# SOURCE: digital-signal-integrity-modeling-and-simulation-with-interconnects-and-package_compress.pdf
# EXTRACTION: this book is SCANNED; content produced by OCR (tesseract 5, 300 DPI). Prose is reliable; equations/figures are best-effort and often garbled, NOT LaTeX.

[PAGE 1]
2 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

1.1 Tradeoffs for Performance Enhancement

To increase the performance of a digital system, the basic approach is to make
changes thal enable faster clocking, more processing. and/or more data transfer per
clock. A few of the factors at the disposal of the system designer are architectural
tradeoffs, bus widths, bus speed, signaling standard. logic family, topology. and
loading. These issues must be balanced to achieve the required performance at a
suitable cost within the allowed time frame and within regulatory limits on radiated

electromagnetic emissions.

1.1.1 Architecture

Systems are best partitioned so that high performance can be achieved using highspeed interconnects only where necessary. Because system architectures cannot
be addressed in general terms. consider as an example a microprocessor system.
Since high-speed memory is expensive, a memory hierarchy is required where small
amounts of expensive, high-speed memory are used in conjunction with large amounts of inexpensive. low-speed memory. How the memory is partitioned and implemented strongly affects the interconnect speeds required and the overall system
performance.

The fastest memory, called the level 1, or L1, cache. is available on the microprocessor itself, but in limited quantity, to both maximize the speed (smaller memories
are faster) and to minimize the die size for least. cost. Additiona! memory is supplied
by the level 2, or 12, cache, which is constructed of static RAM (SRAM, essentially
the same type as used for the microprocessor L1 cache but constructed using a
process optimized for memories). However, the cost of SRAM is many times that
of the cheapest memory available, capacitance-based dynamic RAM (DRAM), so
the L2 cache is not sized to completely fulfill the memory needs of the system. The
bulk of the memory requirements of the system are satisfied by the main memorv
composed of slow (relative to SRAM) DRAM. Even the main memory is insufficient.
so virtual operating systems swap data between memory and disk storage, but a

severe performance penalty results if too much Swapping is performed.

[PAGE 2]
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Young, Brian
Digital signal integrity: modeling and simulation with interconnects and packages /
Brian Young.
P- cm.

Includes index.

ISBN 0-13-028904-3

1. Signal processing--Digital techniques--Computer simulation 2. Telecommunication

systems--Reliability--Computer simulation. I. Title.
TK5102.9 .¥68 2000
621 .382'2--~de21 00-056676

CIP

Editorial/Production Supervision: Vincent Janoski
Acquisitions Editor: Bernard Goodwin

Editorial Assistant: Michelle Vincente

Marketing Manager: Julie Tiso

Manufacturing Manager: Alexis Heydt

Cover Design Director: Jerry Votta

Composition: Lori Hughes

©2001 Prentice Hall PTR

Published by Prentice-Hall PTR.

Prentice-Hall, Inc.

Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458

Prentice Hall books are widely used by corporations and government agencies for training. marketing, and resale.

The publisher offers discounts on this book when ordered in bulk quant ities.
For more information, contact Corporate Sales Department, phone: 800-382-3419:
fax: 201-236-7141; e-mail: corpsales@prenhall.com
or write: Prentice Hall PTR
Corporate Sales Department
One Lake Street
Upper Saddle River, NJ 07458

All products or services mentioned in this book are the trademarks or service marks of their
respective companies or organizations.

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form or by any means, without
permission in writing from the publisher.

Printed in the United States of America.
10 9 8 FTF 6 5 4 3 2 21

ISBN 0-13-028904-3

Prentice-Hall International (UK) Limited, London
Prentice-Hall of Australia Pty. Limited, Sydney
Prentice-Hall Canada Inc., Toronto

Prentice-Hall Hispanoamericana, S.A., Mexico
Prentice-Hall of India Private Limited, New Delhi
Prentice-Hall of Japan, Inc., Tokyo

Pearson Education Asia Pte. Ltd.

Editora Prentice-Hall do Brasil, Ltda., Rio de Janeiro

[PAGE 3]
CONTENTS

PREFACE xiii
1 DIGITAL SYSTEMS AND SIGNALING 1
1.1 Tradeoffs for Performance Enhancement 2
1.1.1 Architecture 2

1.1.2 Bus Width and Speed 4

1.1.3 Power Distribution 3

1.1.4 Topology and Loading 5

1.1.5 Logic Levels and Signaling 6

1.1.6 Power Dissipation 7

1.2 Signaling Standards and Logic Families 9
1.2.1. Noise Margins 12

1.2.2 Setup and Hold Times 13

1.2.3 Drivers 14

1.2.4 Linear Driver Modeling 23

1.2.5 Receivers 24

1.2.6 Receiver Modeling 28

1.3 Interconnects

28

[PAGE 4]
1.4 Modeling of Digital Systems

1.4.1 Analog Quality of Digital Waveforms
1.4.2. Modeling, Frequency Content, and Bandwidth
1.4.3 Process Variations

1.4.4 Challenges for Modeling High-Speed Systems

2 SIGNAL INTEGRITY

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

Transmission Lines

2.1.1 Time-Domain Solution

2.1.2 Directional Independence
2.1.3 Frequency-Domain Solution
2.1.4 Impedance Boundaries

Ideal Point-to-Point Signaling

2.2.1 Fast and Slow Edges

2.2.2 Source and Parallel Termination
2.2.3 Source Termination Only
Nonideal Signaling

2.3.1 Synchronous vs. Asynchronous
2.3.2 Switching Incidence
Discontinuities

2.4.1 Laplace Transform

2.4.2 Capacitive Load

2.4.3 Series Inductance

2.4.4 Shunt Capacitance

2.4.5 Impedance Step

Crosstalk

2.5.1 Capacitive Crosstalk

Contents

32
40
42
52
53

55
56
oF
60
62
70
71
73
73
76
77
77
77
80
81
83
84
91
93
98
98

[PAGE 5]
Contents

2.6
2.7
2.8

2.9

2.5.2 Inductive Crosstalk

2.5.3. Total Crosstalk
Topology

Simultaneous Switching Noise
System Timing

2.8.1 Maximum Clock Rate
2.8.2 Eye Diagrams

2.8.3 Skew, Jitter, and Margin
2.8.4 Dual Data Rate

Exercises

3 SIMULTANEOUS SWITCHING NOISE

3.1

3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5
3.6

Origins of SSN

3.1.1 On-Chip Switching

3.1.2 Off-Chip Switching

3.1.3 Example SPICE Simulations
Effective Inductance

3.2.1 Computing Worst-Case Leas
Off-Chip SSN Dependencies

3.3.1 Feedback and Saturation
SSN-Induced Skew

Fast Simulation of Banks

Exercises

4 MULTIPORT CIRCUITS

4.]
4.2

Z- and Y-Parameters

S-Parameters

10]
103
104
110
111
112
114
119
121
122

129
131
131
135
138
142
143
145
146
147
147

151

153
153
155

[PAGE 6]
vi

4.3
4.4
4.5

4.6

4.2.1 Definition

4.2.2 Circuit Calculations with $-Parameters

Multiport Conversions Between S-, Y-, and ZParameters
Normalization of S-Parameters

Matrix Reductions

4.5.1 Null Excitation

4.5.2 Common Voltage Excitation

Exercises

5 INDUCTANCE

5.1
5.2

5.3

3.4

3.0
5.6

Summary of an Electromagnetic Result
Definitions of Inductance

9.2.1 Thin Wire Definition

5.2.2 Field-Based Definitions

5.2.3 Energy-Based Definition
Definition of Mutual Inductance

9.3.1 Thin Wire Definition

9.3.2 Field-Based Definition

5.3.3 Energy-Based Definition

5.3.4 Sign

Calculations with Neumann's Formula

Contents

159
161
163
163
164
166

173
174
176
176
180
181
182
182
185
185
186

186

5.4.1 Calculation of External Inductance for Loops of Thin Wires 187

5.4.2 Calculation of Internal Inductance for Round Wires

9.4.3 Frequency Dependence of Inductance
Definition of Partial Inductance

Formulas for Partial Self- and Mutua] Inductance

5.6.1 Partial Mutual Inductance between Two Parallel Wires

189

192
193
194

[PAGE 7]
Contents

5.9

9.6.2 Partial Self-Inductance for a Round Wire

5.6.3 Partial Mutual Inductance of Two Colinear Wires
5.6.4 Assembling Solutions

Circuit Symbols

Modal Decomposition

5.8.1 Diagonalization

5.8.2 Circuit Theory

5.8.3 Manual Implernentation

5.8.4 Passivity

Nonuniqueness of Partial Inductance

5.10 Open Loop Modeling

5.11 Manipulating the Reference Lead

9.12 Model Reduction

0.13 Exercises

6 CAPACITANCE

6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6

6.7
6.8
6.9

Definition of Capacitance

Capacitance between Several Conductors
Energy Definition of Capacitance
Frequency Dependence

Circuit Equations with Capacitance
Modal Decomposition and Passivity
6.6.1 Modal Decomposition

6.6.2 Passivity

Reference and Capacitance

Model Reduction

Exercises

vii

210
213
219

219

229
229
233
237
238
239

241

[PAGE 8]
Contents

5.8

5.9

5.6.2 Partial Self-Inductance for a Round Wire

5.6.3 Partial Mutual Inductance of Two Colinear Wires
5.6.4 Assembling Solutions

Circuit Symbols

Modal Decomposition

5.8.1 Diagonalization

5.8.2 Circuit Theory

5.8.3 Manual Implementation

9.8.4 Passivity

Nonuniqueness of Partial Inductance

5.10 Open Loop Modeling

5.11 Manipulating the Reference Lead

5.12 Model Reduction

5.13 Exercises

6 CAPACITANCE

6.1
6.2
6.3
6.4
6.5
6.6

6.7
6.8
6.9

Definition of Capacitance

Capacitance between Several Conductors
Energy Definition of Capacitance
Frequency Dependence

Circuit Equations with Capacitance
Modal Decomposition and Passivity
6.6.1 Modal Decomposition

6.6.2 Passivity

Reference and Capacitance

Model Reduction

Exercises

vil

197
199
200
201
202
203

229
229
233
237
238
239
241
241
243
244
245
246

[PAGE 9]
Contents

8.5
8.6

1x

8.4.5 Resolution
8.4.6 Multiport TDR Measurements
Tradeoffs

Exercises

9 LUMPED MODELING

9.1
9,2
9.3

9.4
9.5
9.6
9.7

9.8

9.9

Transmission Line Introduction
Multiconductor Modeling with Two Samples
Multiconductor Modeling with One Sample
9.3.1 a-Network Topology

9.3.2 T-Network Topology

9.3.3 Practical Issues

Internal Nodes

Frequency Dependence

Iterative Impedance and Bandwidth

Model Reduction

9.7.1 Parallel Leads

9.7.2 Open, Short, and Matched Leads
9.7.3 Excess Leads

9.7.4 Symmetry

Approaches for Specific Interconnects

9.8.1 QFP

9.8.2 Edge Connectors

9.8.3 BGA

9.8.4 Internal Nodes

General Topology

9.10 Multidrop Nets

305
305
307
309

316
317
318
319
320
324
326
329
329
329
330
331
332
332
334
335
336
336
339

[PAGE 10]
9.11 Exercises

10 WIDEBAND MODELING
10.1 Transmission Line Lumped Modeling
10.1.1 Limits of Lumped Modeling
10.1.2 Multilumped Models
10.2 Coupled Transmission Lines
10.2.1 Telegrapher Equations
10.2.2. Modal Decomposition
10.2.3 Modal Decomposition Examples
10.3 Skin Effect Models
10.4 Black Box Modeling
10.4.1 Single Port
10.4.2 Multiple Ports

10.5 Exercises

11 ENHANCING SIGNAL INTEGRITY

11.1 Differential Signaling

11.2 Termination
11.2.1 Parasitics and Location
11.2.2 Static Power Dissipation and Current Carrying
11.2.3 Voltage Swing
11.2.4 Diode Termination
11.2.5 Source Termination

11.38 Multiconductor Termination
11.3.1 Single Transmission Line

11.3.2 Differential Pair

Contents

Requirements :

341

345
346
346
347
348

349

380
387

391
39]
394

394

404

404

[PAGE 11]
DIGITAL

Interconnects
and
Packages

BRIAN YOUNG

Prencce Hall Modern Seenigordipcioe Dheagen do

[PAGE 12]
PREFACE

Effects of interconnects on the electrical performance of digital components, such
as microprocessors, have historically been small enough to handle with simple rules
of thumb. As clock rates, bus widths, and bus speeds have increased, packaging and
interconnects have more importance and in some cases actually limit or define the
system, where silicon performance is usually found to be the gating factor. This role
reversal will become more common, and it may be that packaging and interconnects
dominate electrical considerations at some point in the future as networks become
more prominent.

The relatively recent growth of packaging and interconnects as signficant issues
in electrical performance means that relatively few resources exist for learning and
training. Much of it exists as scattered applications notes, many of which are quite
useful but are sometimes somewhat dated (i.e., notes on ECL rather than CMOS) or
are from the less accessible technical literature. Since many organizations are newly
finding the need for expertise in the field, in-house experts may not be available to
act as mentors.

This book represents my efforts at collecting and deriving the necessary material
to support a career in digital signal integrity modeling and simulation. A huge part
of such a job is package and interconnect modeling from electromagnetic simulation
and/or measurements. By necessity, the book spans a broad spectrum of techniques,
including electromagnetic simulation, transmission line theory, frequency-domain

modeling, time-domain modeling, analog circuit simulation, digital signaling, and

xiii

[PAGE 13]
xiv Preface
some architectural issues, to put it all in perspective. Such a broad technological
reach makes for a very interesting and challenging job. Since T believe that the
number of engineers working this area will need to increase dramatically to support
the technological trends, I hope that this book will provide a sufficient set of tools
to help engineers succeed in this field.

The goal of the book is to provide detailed introductory material that is selfconsistent and self-contained. As such, there are very few references. There is nothing in the book that is new to the field, so technical credit must go to the innumerable
contributors to the technical literature, application notes, and standards.

The book is organized to move gradually from broad, general topics to specific
modeling techniques. Particular emphasis is placed on rigorous derivation and on
multiconductor interconnects. Chapter 1 discusses the role of signal integrity in digital systems. Chapters 2 and 3 then cover issues in signaling and signal integrity.
Chapters 4 through 7 cover detailed concepts in basic passive circuit components,
with particular emphasis on multiconductor interconnects. One of the more difficult aspects of detailed simulations in signal integrity is the need to model multiconductor interconnects such as sockets, packages, edge connectors, and buses.
Experimental characterization of interconnects is covered in chapter 8, where emphasis is on measurements of very small parasitics for high leadcount interconnects.
Interconnect modeling is covered in chapters 9 and 10, where distinction is drawn
between low-frequency lumped modeling and high-frequency wideband modeling.
Because interconnects are often physically small, lumped modeling is often the optimal choice. Finally, chapter 11 provides extended coverage of signal integrity topics
and represents advanced application of material and concepts from prior chapters.

The manuscript was typeset using IATEX 2- running under Linux on a PC
clone based on a Tyan motherboard with a Cyrix processor. The text was prepared using a custom text editor written in Tel /Tk. Circuit simulations used Berkeley SPICE 3f4. The figures were prepared using Xfig. Symbolic manipulation used

Mathematica™ 1

1. Mathematica is a trademark of Wolfram Research, Inc.

[PAGE 14]
Preface

I came to the digital packaging field from analog microwave packaging and numerical methods in electromagnetics. As such, I needed a kick start to get me going.
In particular, thanks go to Aubrey Sparkman for many interesting discussions when
J first entered the field. Later on I had the pleasure of working with Greg Pitner. who
challenged me with many tough questions, so thanks to Greg, Thanks go to Joel
Dietz for encouraging me to start writing the book. I would like to thank Francis
Bostick and Robert Flake for letting me use an early version of the book to teach a
graduate course on packaging at the University of Texas. Thanks go to Bruce Wagner for providing the line card from which a few of the photographs are taken. Mv
early technical mentors deserve much credit, so thanks to my dad, Charles Young.
and to Joe Owens. Writing a book is an enormous undertaking, so special thanks
to my lovely wife, Monica Carlson, for sacrificing a big chunk of time over the many

years required.

Brian Young

Austin, Texas

[PAGE 15]
Chapter 1

DIGITAL SYSTEMS
AND SIGNALING

Computing performance can be enhanced with a wide variety of techniques, including dense integration, fast circuit styles such as dynamic logic, advanced compilers.
high-throughput architectures, wide instructions and data, parallel processing. and
faster clock rates, to name a few. For maximum performance, all high-speed components of a system should be integrated onto a single die; however, technological
difficulties (especially yields for large die) prevent the implementation of systemon-a-chip except for simple cases. A continuing problem then is interconnection
of high-speed parts, and as component clock rates increase. the bandwidth of the
interconnections must increase too.

The principal ways to increase interconnect bandwidth are to clock it faster or to
increase the width, or both. The factors that complicate the design are the signaling
standard, compatibility, power dissipation, and costs associated with packaging.
printed circuit board (PCB) area, and silicon area. A comprehensive system design
effort will trade these considerations off against architectural issues and related
costs. To help support system design tradeoff optimization, modeling and simulation
can be performed to estimate performance. The critical issues in accurate estimates

are model availability, model accuracy, and appropriate model use.

[PAGE 16]
2 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

1.1 Tradeoffs for Performance Enhancement

To increase the performance of a digital system, the basic approach is to make
changes thal enable faster clocking, more processing. and/or more data transfer per
clock. A few of the factors at the disposal of the system designer are architectural
tradeoffs, bus widths, bus speed, signaling standard. logic family, topology. and
loading. These issues must be balanced to achieve the required performance at a
suitable cost within the allowed time frame and within regulatory limits on radiated

electromagnetic emissions.

1.1.1 Architecture

Systems are best partitioned so that high performance can be achieved using highspeed interconnects only where necessary. Because system architectures cannot
be addressed in general terms. consider as an example a microprocessor system.
Since high-speed memory is expensive, a memory hierarchy is required where small
amounts of expensive, high-speed memory are used in conjunction with large amounts of inexpensive. low-speed memory. How the memory is partitioned and implemented strongly affects the interconnect speeds required and the overall system
performance.

The fastest memory, called the level 1, or L1, cache. is available on the microprocessor itself, but in limited quantity, to both maximize the speed (smaller memories
are faster) and to minimize the die size for least. cost. Additiona! memory is supplied
by the level 2, or 12, cache, which is constructed of static RAM (SRAM, essentially
the same type as used for the microprocessor L1 cache but constructed using a
process optimized for memories). However, the cost of SRAM is many times that
of the cheapest memory available, capacitance-based dynamic RAM (DRAM), so
the L2 cache is not sized to completely fulfill the memory needs of the system. The
bulk of the memory requirements of the system are satisfied by the main memorv
composed of slow (relative to SRAM) DRAM. Even the main memory is insufficient.
so virtual operating systems swap data between memory and disk storage, but a

severe performance penalty results if too much Swapping is performed.

[PAGE 17]
Section 1.1. Tradeoffs for Performance Enhancement 3

The memory hierarchy can be organized in many ways, with four options depicted in Figure 1.1. A basic layout is shown in Figure |.la, where a microprocessor
with its Ll cache and the main memory form the memory hierarchy. High-speed
operation on the system bus is inhibited by the complex topologies of the nets
needed to connect many memory devices and by their heavy loading. For the usual
case where the main memory is slower than the system bus, performance can be
improved by placing a small quantity of high-speed L2 cache memory on the system
bus as shown in Figure 1.1b. For data stored in the cache, access can be achieved
at the top speed of the system bus. However, the system bus is still complex with

many devices connected to it, so the speed of the system bus is limited.

System Bus

Disk
Disk
Video
Add-in
Add-in
Add-in
Disk
Disk
Video
Add-in
Add-in
Add-in

(b)

System Bus

eee ----

= 'as 's
a o nl a oO e& of 8
nm wm ££ fal man [es |
- -s SG 3 83 8 24 8g zs uy
ae ¢ 2228 Aaa =F F283
(c) (d)

Figure 1.1. Four memory hierarchies for microprocessor-based systems: (a) no L2

cache, (b) L2 cache on system bus, (c) inline L2 cache, and (d) back-door cache.

[PAGE 18]
4 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

Considerable performance can be gained by moving the L2 cache off of the slow
system bus. One alternative, called an inline cache, is to place the cache between the
microprocessor and the system bus, as shown in Figure 1.1d. The interconnect between the microprocessor and cache is very simple, just point-to-point connections,
so very high clock speeds are possible. For system bus transactions not involving
the cache, the cache controller simply passes data through to the slower system bus.
Performance can be further enhanced by moving the interface to the L2 onto the
microprocessor itself, as shown in Figure 1.1c. The so-called backdoor cache enables
the microprocessor to access L2 data on a fast dedicated interface simultaneous to
executing transactions on the system bus.

The microprocessor example illustrates one of the principal methods for enhancing system performance: system partitioning to enable faster interconnects between
critical components. For microprocessors, the critical off-chip interface is to the L2
cache. Multiprocessor systems may also find a need for such dedicated interfaces
between processors. Added performance due to dedicated buses has a price: higher
pin counts, more complex routing on the system card, and more noise from the

additional switching by the extra output buffers.

1.1.2 Bus Width and Speed

Another direct way to increase the information carrying capacity of an interconnect
is to simply make the interconnect wider or faster. Doubling the bus width gives
an immediate doubling of the bus bandwidth; however, wider buses require more
package pins and more PCB real estate, and the extra drivers use more silicon
real estate, dissipate more power, and create more noise. Doubling the bus speed
(if possible) also doubles the bus bandwidth while using no additional physical
resources, but designs are much more difficult, noise and radiation can be worse,
and power dissipation increases. Wider and faster buses create switching noise that
can only be minimally damped with the addition of bypass capacitance, so buses

must be carefully designed and executed to ensure reliable operation,

[PAGE 19]
Section 1.1. Tradeoffs for Performance Enhancement

The evolution of the personal computer expansion bus illustrates the use of
higher clocks and wider buses for higher bus bandwidth. The original ISA bus was 16
bits wide and clocked at 8.3MHz for a peak bus bandwidth of 16.6MB/s. To enable
higher throughput, the PCI bus was introduced at 32 bits wide and 33.3MHz for a
peak bandwidth of 133MB/s. Further throughput enhancements included increases
in bus width to 64 bits and in speed to 66.6 MHz speed for 533MB/s peak bandwidth.
Each jump in bus width and speed requires ever-tighter control of bus topology,

layout, driver and receiver design, connector and package selection, and timing.

1.1.3. Power Distribution

Higher levels of integration enable integrated circuits to process more data per
clock, but more transistors also means more power is required in less time. Package
parasitics, while very small, can produce large voltage swings relative to the power
supply levels. Reliable operation requires low levels of noise, so packaging parasitics
must be minimized. However, high-speed circuits generate considerable levels of
high-frequency noise due to the sharp edges of the digital waveforms, and package
parasitics help block their access to the system level where electromagnetic interference (EMI) is more easily launched due to the larger circuit dimensions. High-speed
circuits create a tradeoff between power supply ripple and EMI suppression. Bypass

capacitance can help smooth the ripple and suppress EMI.

1.1.4 Topology and Loading

Topology plays a critical role in determining the maximum speed at which an interconnect can be clocked. The fastest interconnect is a unidirectional point-to-point
connection between two devices over impedance-controlled transmission lines with
a matching scheme to absorb any reflections that may be generated by the source
or load. Any deviation from this setup will lower the maximum attainable clock
speed. In particular, when three or more devices must be connected (called a multedrop net), impedance control is compromised due to reflections generated at the

impedance discontinuity where the extra components must connect.

[PAGE 20]
6 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

Multidrop nets can be configured in a wide variety of wavs. Two major methods
are the daisy chain route and the star cluster. For the daisy chain, one long route
passes near each component, which is then connected with a short stub. The principal needs are to keep the route and the stubs as short as possible. For the star
cluster, each device is connected to a central hub with equal-length transmission
lines, and the key design criteria is that the lengths and loadings should be very
similar.

After topology, loading is the next most critical aspect regulating clock speeds
on interconnects. Each input of a device adds capacitive loading to the net. so
large numbers of devices (as in memory subsytems) result in large loadings and
slow speeds due to RC charging times. Light loading is required for high speed.
Capacitive loading is mostly due to packaging, electrostatic discharge {ESD) protection diodes, and output buffers in their high-impedance state (for I/O cells).
Since ESD structures and packaging are hard to avoid, highest speed is attainable
for unidirectional nets (such as address buses).

Terminations can be used to dramatically enhance signal quality for higher
speeds by dissipating unwanted reflections. Series termination can slow the signaling by increasing RC charging times, while parallel termination increases power
dissipation. Both types of termination increase parts count, cost, and PCB board
complexity and area.

Architectural needs for high-speed signaling can eventually dictate the use of
point-to-point interconnections. When several parts must be interconnected with
point-to-point interconnects, one or more crossbars are required to establish the
connections. Crossbars can require large numbers of pins, leading to expensive pack-

aging.

1.1.5 Logic Levels and Signaling

There is a well known hierarchy of techniques for improving signal integrity on
interconnects to enable higher clock rates. In rough order of performance-enhancing

effect, these techniques are

[PAGE 21]
Section 1.1. Tradeoffs for Performance Enhancement

1. Topology

2. Termination

3. Reduced voltage swing

4. Slew rate control

5. Differential receiver with a reference voltage

6. Fully differential drivers and receivers

These techniques can be used singly or in combination to balance performance.
power dissipation, and cost.

At the low end of performance is standard CMOS or TTL signaling utilizing large
voltage swings, no termination, and generally no slew rate control. Used on relativel Vv
slow and heavily loaded buses, CMOS and TTL drivers are usually optimized to
switch large capacitive loads. However, power dissipation is relatively small.

At the high end of performance is emitter-coupled logic (ECL) utilizing reduced
voltage swing, controlled edge rates. termination. and fully differential signaling.
The price paid for using ECL is high power dissipation and larger pin counts. These
features also appear in the Low-Voltage Differential Signaling (LVDS) standard.
which provides for more convenient voltages and lower power dissipation.

A wide variety of intermediate signaling standards are possible. a few of which
are discussed in section 1.2. In addition. mixed standards are also utilized. For
example, in many systems the clock is transmitted fully differential to minimize

clock skew, but the signals are not differential {termed single-ended).

1.1.6 Power Dissipation

The level of power dissipation can become a limiting factor in interconnect design.
Consider an unterminated clock, which must charge and then discharge its capaci-

tive load every cycle with period T. The average power dissipation per clock period

[PAGE 22]
8 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

is then
é
Pag = T
2($CV*)
T
CV" f, (1.1)

where f = 1/T is the clock frequency, and V is the power supply voltage. For a
data line with transitions only on the rising or falling edge of the clock, the average
power dissipation is 5CV? f. For example, a 72-bit bus operating at 33MHz with a
3.3V interface and a maximum load of 50pF per bit results in a maximum average
power dissipation of 0.65W.

Because of its square dependence, power is most easily reduced through lower
interface voltages, which also helps reduce noise. After that, a linear reduction with
lower capacitance is possible, although a lower capacitance means less loading and a
consequent reduction in fan out. Frequency is generally increasing to provide higher
performance, and this is usually the cause of efforts to reduce power through voltage
and capacitance reduction.

The power dissipation for parallel-terminated nets is

R+Z,
where F2 is the driver impedance and Z, is the characteristic impedance of the transmission line. Power dissipation can also reach this level on long unterminated nets
when the round trip delay equals half the clock period. With the square dependence
on voltage, again reduction in voltage is the most effective means of reducing power
dissipation.

Differential signaling with terminated current-mode drivers can minimize the
dependence of power dissipation on frequency. In contrast, power dissipation for
unterminated voltage-mode signaling increases linearly with frequency. For minimization of power dissipation, unterminated voltage-mode signaling is preferred
at low frequencies, while terminated current-mode signaling is preferred at. high

frequencies. This power relationship is sketched in Figure 1.2.

[PAGE 23]
Section 1.2. Signaling Standards and Logic Families

terminated currentmode signaling 2-7 __--

unterminated voltagemode signaling

Power Dissipation

fo
Frequency

Figure 1.2. Frequency dependence of power dissipation for unterminated voltage

mode signaling and terminated current-mode signaling.

1.2 Signaling Standards and Logic Families

Successful communication requires that the driver and receiver agree on what voltage levels constitute logic low and logic high. For voltage-mode signaling such as
TTL, the driver directly sets the output voltage. For current-mode signaling, the
driver sets the current level, and the voltage drop across a termination resistor at
the receiver is detected. In either case, it is sufficient to discuss signaling in terms
of the voltages set by the driver and the voltages detected by the receiver.

A signaling standard specifies the voltages for logic high and logic low for both
the driver and receiver. A noise margin is built into the specification. In addition,
termination requirements are specified. A wide variety of signaling standards exist to address different performance and cost design points. A few of the common
standards are listed in Tables 1.1 and 1.2, where they appear roughly in order of
the maximum speed attainable. Higher speeds are obtained through termination,
reduced voltage swing, slew rate control, and differential receivers. Parallel termination and differential receivers consume static power, so as high-speed options are
added, power consumption increases.

A logic family is a specific implementation of a signaling standard with additional
requirements on timing-related performance, including slew rate (rise/fall times),

setup and hold times, and fan out. Faster circuits have greater power dissipation

[PAGE 24]
OT

a. PP- push-pull: OD - open-drain (active pul

Table 1.1, Comparison of driver specifications for several common signaling standards

Niandard |} Yppg, V

Min | Max Min |
TTL 5+ 10% 0.4 2A
IVTTL! 3.310% 4} 24
GTL® 1.245% 04 | Vong
QTL 0.4
HSTL 1x01 0.4 | Vong - 04
BCL? =) 3.255% | 1.810 | 1.620} -1.025
PECL' |) 5.045% } 3.190 | 3.380} 3.975
LVPECL' |} 3345% | 1490] 1680] 2975

Vong

01880
4,120
2,420

Vaitfere

-down}; CM - current-mode

tials \

Viet: V
Max

ination

Jone

50M) to -2V
500)
500

Rto L2+5% V4

Driver"

PP
PP
PP
OD
PP
OM
CM
CM

LVDS) 0.995 LAT4 | 0.250 | 0.400} 1195 | 1.275 500 CM

b. JEDEC Standard, "luterface standard for nominal 3V /3.3V supply digital integrated circuits," Electronic: Industries Association.
JESD8-A, June 1994.

c. JEDEU Standard, "Gunning transceiver logic (GTL) low-level, high-speed interface standatd for digital integrated cinvnits," Elec-

tronic Industries Association, JESDR-3, The standard defines unterninated and terminated implementations, GTL 1s patented.

d, The resistor value is chosen to match the impeclance of the system.

é, ELA/JEDEC Standard, "High-speed transceiver logic (HSTL) a LAV output buffer supply voltage-hased interfare standard for

digital integrated circuits." Flectronie Industries Association, EIA/JEDECKG, August 1998,

f. HSTL defines driver types 1 TV for four eases of unterminated, source terminated, fi-end Lerminated. and farend phis nea-eud

parallel ternuuated, respectively. Al must satisty the same output specifications.

g, JEDEC Standard, "Standard for operating voltages and interface levels for low voltage eunitter-coupled lngic (ECL) integrated
curcuits," Electronic Industries Association, JESD8-2, Mareh 1993.

h, PECL (Positive ECL) is ECL run with a +5V supply. See Cleon Petty and Todd Pearson, "Designing with PECL (ECL at +5.0V)."

Motorola Application Note AN1406, Feb. 1998,

1, LVPECE (Low-Voltage PECL) is ECL run with a +3.3V supply.

}. (EEE Standard, "Standard for low voltage differential signals for sealable colierent interface (SCI)." TREF P1596.3/D1.8, Nov.

1908.

[PAGE 25]
Standard

Table 1.2, Comparison of receiver specifications for several conmmon signaling standards

Vong V Vin, V

TIL = ff 510%

ITIL }/ 83410% | 03 ] 08
GT 19.45%! Vorpy "0.05
HSTL! |} 15401 | 03 | Vppp 0.1
HSTL =f} 15401

RCL }} 5.255% | -1.810

PECL jf 5045% | 3.190

INPECL | 3.345% | 1.490

LVDS

Vin, V

20

Ver t0.05
Vpgp + 0.1

Vpp -03

Vong + 0.3

0.880
4.120

a. SE- single-ended: D - differential; PD - pseudo-differential /comparitor

b, Specified for unterminated case only,
c. Vea = 2/3Vonq

d, HSTL specifies both pseudo-differential and differential receivers.
é. Var = Vopg/2

Veange, V

3

Vongt
().3

differential: V_ | Veommon, V

tt | Baw [a

0.8 2.0

02

Max

Vongt
(1.6

mode

Receiver"

PD
PD

Vo So oS

[PAGE 26]
12 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

and generate more noise, so generally the slowest family that meets timing should
be used.

For example, the original TTL standard has been implemented severa] times to
achieve higher speed or lower power dissipation, where the goal is to improve the
speed-power product. The 74X.X family founded the standard. In the Schottky TTL
(74SXX) family, the transistors are augmented with integral Schottky diodes across
the base-collector junction to prevent them from saturating. Faster switching speeds
result since the junctions do not have to be cleared of excess charge before the transistors can turn off. In addition, resistor values are reduced to achieve smaller RC
time constants at the expense of higher power dissipation. Other TTL families include low-power Schottky (74LSXX), advanced Schottky (75ASXX), Fast (74F XX),
and advanced low-power Schottky (74ALSXX).

Two circuits using different signaling standards require interface circuits to enable communication. Two circuits using different families of the same signaling
standard can communicate, but the interface speed is limited to that of the slower
family.

Reliable signaling is achieved when the signaling standard specifications are met
under full, adverse noise conditions as well as device variations due both to process

deviations in manufacturing and to changes over the operating temperature range.

1.2.1 Noise Margins

Noise margins are defined by the signaling standard. For a given standard, assume
that the desired voltage levels for logic high and low are Vq and Vr, respectively.
Also assume, for convenience of discussion, that Vy > Vz, although signaling could
easily be worked the other way around.

For logic high, the driver is specified to reach and exceed a minimum output
voltage, Vow < Vy. To successfully communicate, then the receiver must accept
as logic high any voltage above Vin < Vow. The noise margin is then NMy =

Vou -- Vru.

[PAGE 27]
Section 1.2. Signaling Standards and Logic Families 13

Overshoct -->

Va poo no f }fAcfxen-------------f4- ea ---------- i Logic High
Von [2p Mee cep een fe Mee. NM .
AS ee Se i an
Undershoot
2 Plateau ~x. (Ringback)
2
s
a a ee
IL NM
Vo. i

Vv, b--4------------ PHA 4 for -~- Logic Low

Overshoot --=>

Time

Figure 1.3. Voltage levels and specifications for digital signaling.

For logic low, the driver is specified to fall and hold below a maximum output
voltage, Vor > Vz. The receiver must accept as logic low any voltage below V;;, >
Vox, so the noise margin is NM; = Vit -- Vor.

For example, the levels for TTL are Vin < 0.8V, Vin > 2V, Vor < 0.4V, and
Von > 2.4V. Therefore, the noise margins for TTL are at least 0.4V.

The logic family specifies how quickly the voltages must transition between
valid logic levels. Fundamentally, all digital signals are analog in nature. The logic
voltage level specifications are shown in Figure 1.3 along with a representative
noisy waveform showing some common defects and their names. If the ringback
violates the signaling specification, then additional time must be allowed so that
the waveform can settle within the specification. Settling time reduces the maximum

clock rate of the system.

1.2.2 Setup and Hold Times

Receivers sample the waveform, and this process takes time. Within a logic family,
receiver specifications include limits on the timing and duration of input waveforms
in addition to Viz and V;;. For clocked systems, the two primary specification are

the setup and hold times.

[PAGE 28]
14 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

anf \ ff \ ff \ f/f \_S
DATA a? Ga Ga

H

Figure 1.4. Setup and hold times define when the waveform must meet input

voltage specifications at the receiver.

The setup time is the time the waveform must meet input voltage specifications
(in other words, the waveform is settled) before the clock edge signals the receiver
to sample. The hold time is the time after the clock edge during which the waveform
must still meet the input voltage specifications. The setup and hold times are graphically represented in Figure 1.4, where idealized time-dependent voltage waveforms
represent the digital signals. The speed of an interface is strongly affected by setup

and hold times and driver slew rate (see section 2.8.1).

1.2.3. Drivers

From a signal integrity point of view, driver designs fall into two basic categories:
push-pull and current-steering. The push-pull driver uses transistors to connect the
output to either of two voltage levels to indicate the logic level. The current~steering
driver uses two different levels of current to indicate logic levels, where the current is
converted to voltage at a termination resistor to enable detection. From the receiver
point of view, the driver type is immaterial since voltage levels are what need to be
detected. Push-pull drivers can be very simple and generally dissipate low power.
Current-steering drivers typically dissipate higher power but offer the best signal
integrity.

Drivers are analog circuits that must provide shaped outputs under varying load

conditions. Because transistor J-V curves are nonlinear, the output impedance is also

[PAGE 29]
Section 1.2. Signaling Standards and Logic Families AS

nonlinear. High-accuracy signal integrity simulations require either a transistor-level
driver model or I-V curves, such as those used in IBIS (Input/Output Buffer Interface Specification), to capture the nonlinear effects. The most important nonlinear
effect is the increase in driver impedance and edge rate as the power supply droops.
and an accurate simulation of this relationship is required to obtain accurate esti-

mates of simultaneous switching noise (SSN).

Push-Pull Drivers

The basic configuration for a CMOS push-pull (or totem-pole) driver is shown in
Figure 1.5, where a PMOS enhancement MOSFET (PFET) pulls the output up
to logic high Vpp while an NMOS enhancement MOSFET (NFET) pulls down to
logic low Vss. The gate signals A and A may be tied together (in which case the
driver is a basic CMOS inverter) or driven separately to manage crowbar current.
When both A and A are high, then the pull-up transistor is off and the pull-down
transistor is on, so the output is pulled towards Vss. Conversely, if A and A are low.
then the output is pulled towards Vnp. The CMOS totem-pole driver as discussed
here is a full-swing driver from Veg to Vpn. and while such a large voltage range
provides for plenty of noise margin at the receiver, it also creates considerable noise.

Ideally, the pull-up and pull-down transistors are operated out of phase so that

Vop

A -- PMOS

A -- NMOS

SS

Figure 1.5. Schematic of a push-pull driver implemented in CAIOS.

[PAGE 30]
16 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

one is off while the other is on; however, to obtain maximum speed, the pull-up and
pull-down transistors are operated simultaneously. so inevitably there is a small
interval when both transistors are on so that a low-impedance path exists directly
from the power supply to ground. The current through this path, called crowbar
current, feedthrough current, or overlap current, performs no logic function and
represents wasted power and extra noise.

Since the driver itself consists of two transistors in series where one is always off
(except during transition), the driver dissipates very little power (set by the current
leakage of the off transistor) while holding a logic level. For capacitive loads, then
the totem-pole driver dissipates very little power once the capacitor is charged. In
other words, the power dissipation is dominated by that required to charge and
discharge the load capacitance. In this configuration, totem-pole drivers are said to
have no static power dissipation.

If additional circuitry is added to the basic gate, both pull-up and pull-down
transistors can be turned off so that the impedance tooking into the output is very
high. The high-impedance state is useful for implementing buses where multiple
drivers are connected simultaneously to the same circuit. Multiple connections to
a bus create the potential for a low-impedance path across the power supply. Just
as crowbar current can exist in a single totem-pole driver. buses can create the
same problem if one driver tries to pull the line high while another tries to pull the
line low, as illustrated in Figure 1.6. This situation is called bus contention. and
it dissipates excess power with the threat of component burnout while causing a
logical fault. Bus contention is avoided by careful control of timing.

The output impedance of the totem-pole driver varies depending on which transistor is active. For low-to-high transitions, the pull-up transistor does the work, and
its I-V characteristics plus any series resistance sets the output impedance. Similarly, for high-to-low transitions, the pull-down transistor plus any series resistance
sets the output impedance.

Depending on the logic state, the push-pull driver utilizes different paths to

[PAGE 31]
Section 1.2. Signaling Standards and Logic Families 17

Ul

Driver, ES
Holding "

High

. Direct Current
J. Path to Ground

U2

Driver I
Holding t=
Low q O

LL EL TEL

.

NTT
if

Bus

Figure 1.6. Bus contention creates a high-current path that dissipates excess power

and can cause component burnout.

provide current to the load. As illustrated in Figure 1.7, the logic high state uses
the signal line and Vpn. The pull-up transistor discharges any capacitance to Vpp
while providing a path to charge capacitance to Vgg. Similarlv, the logic low state
uses the signal line and Vss, where the pull-down transistor charges capacitance to
Vpp while discharging capacitance to Vsg. The crowbar current uses only Vpp and
Vss and performs no logic function since it does not help to charge or discharge
any load capacitance.

'To model the switching characteristics of the push-pull driver, all three legs of
the path must be present in the model: Vpp, signal, and Vg. Assuming that Vgs
is taken as the reference, then a four-port model is required to provide Vpp and
signal connections at the driver and at the load. When modeling the interconnect
with lumped elements or general multiport networks, the port requirements are eas-

ily met. For transmission line modeling, many simulators provide only a two-port

[PAGE 32]
18 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

N

ra
~---------'

V

- Crowbar

Figure 1.7. Current paths during signaling with totem-pole drivers in CMOS with

rail-to-rail voltage swings: (a) logic high, (b) logic low.

[PAGE 33]
Section 1.2. Signaling Standards and Logic Families 19

transmission line model, which is insufficient without several simplifying assumptions.

To use a two-port transmission line medel with a push-pull driver, two conditions
must be met. First, the pull-up and pull-down output impedances must be equal.
Second, infinite bypass capacitance must exist both at the driver and at the load so
that Vpp can be treated as a broadband AC ground. In other words, power distribution is ideal with no power supply disturbances. While stringent, these conditions
are often sufficiently met when using high-speed drivers, which must match pull-up
and pull-down output impedances for best performance, and when just a few signals
are switching so that power distribution perturbations are minimal. When a significant fraction of a device's drivers are switching, simultaneous switching noise will
significantly disturb the power supply levels, so two-port transmission line models

are hot appropriate for this case.

Open-Drain and Open-Collector Drivers

One transistor of a push-pull driver can be replaced with a resistor so that the power
supply itself pulls the output to a logic state. Due to the much lower mobility of
holes compared to electrons, the PFET transistor in a CMOS push-pull driver is
approximately three times larger than the NFET transistor, so it is advantageous
to replace the pull-up PMOS rather than the pull-down NFET transistor to save
the additional area and capacitance.

A typical open-drain CMOS driver setup is shown in Figure 1.8a, where the
power supply pulls the line to Viz through the resistor when the NFET is off. The
resistor also acts as a termination to improve signal integrity. A good location for
the resistor is at the receiver, but bus topology may dictate placement at another
location, or even splitting the resistor into multiple locations.

Open-drain and open-collector drivers are convenient for creating wired-OR
buses as shown in Figure 1.8b. When all drivers are off (all NFETs off), the bus
is pulled high through the pull-up resistors. Any driver can pull the bus low by

[PAGE 34]
20 Digital! Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

Zo
Zo

(a)

Lo

(b)

Figure 1.8. Open-drain drivers used to (a) drive a single line, or (b) construct a

wired-OR bus.

turning on its driver (one NFET on), giving the bus the logical OR function. The
driver will launch a wave in both directions, due to symmetry, and each wave will
propagate to the ends of the bus where the waves are terminated by the pull-up

resistors. The effective impedance seen by the driver is Z,/2. The transmission lines

[PAGE 35]
Section 1.2. Signaling Standards and Logic Families 21

forming the bus are loaded by the capacitance of the drivers and should take this
loading into account (see chapter 2, section 2.6).

The advantages of open-drain/open-collector design include lower output capacitance, smaller driver area on silicon, adjustable termination impedance, and the

ability to create a wired-OR, bus. The main disadvantage is the static dissipation of

DC power.

Current-Steering Drivers

A couple of configurations for the current-steering (or current-mode) driver are
shown in Figure 1.9. There are two hallmark features of a current-steering driver:
a constant-current source and parallel routing paths for the current. The driver
operates by routing the current through one leg or the other so that the current
drawn from the power supply is almost constant, generating little noise due to small
dI/dt fluctuations. There are two complementary outputs, so the current-steering
driver is inherently differential. Circuit board routing is by differential pair, with
characteristic impedance Z,. = Ry, to a fully differential receiver.

The driver in Figure 1.9a uses two identical NFETs in an open-drain configuration. The output voltage is developed across the load resistors, 2;, and is adjustable
by the termination voltage, Vj. Symmetry is critical to balance the current drawn
down each leg. When Vin is high, Q; is on and @2 is off, and the current routes
through the left-hand leg to produce a voltage drop of TR; across the termination
resistor. While Q, pulls Voy, down to V;, --I Fi, the power supply pulls Vou up to
Vie. A differential receiver detects the difference in voltage across the outputs, JR.
Note that this configuration develops a sizable common-mode voltage of Vi;--IR, /2
at the input of the receiver, leaving less of the receiver's common-mode range for
noise cancellation.

The driver in Figure 1.9b uses four FETs to route the current in opposite directions through the single termination resistor. When Y,, is low, then Qs3 and Qe

are on while Q; and Q4 are off, so the current routes through the load from top

[PAGE 36]
22 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

(a) (b)

Figure 1.9. Two configurations for current-steering drivers: (a) open-drain, (b)

fully differential.

to bottom, developing a voltage +/Rz,. When Vin is high, then Q, and Q@a are on
while Qg and Qo are off, so the current routes through the load from bottom to top,
developing a voltage ~IR,. A differential receiver detects the voltage developed
across the load resistor.

In both designs, logic high is a differential voltage of +/R,, while logic low is
--lR,. The differential voltage swing is then +/R_.

Power Dissipation Revisited

The average power dissipation for a clock-like signal is shown in (1.1) to be Payg =
CV' f using energy arguments. For a simple switch model of the totem-pole driver
with a capacitive load, the same result can be found by explicitly integrating the

instantaneous power.

[PAGE 37]
Section 1.2. Signaling Standards and Logic Families 23

The power supply charges the capacitor through the driver impedance holding
high for half the clock cycle. In the second half of the cycle, the power supply
provides no power since the capacitor discharges through the driver impedance

holding low. While charging, the voltage across the capacitor is
va(t) = V Q --e/ RC)
so the instantaneous power drawn from the supply is
rs dy _ V? --t/RC
P(t) = Vi(t) = VOT = Fe ;

Integrating the power over a half a cycle and dividing by the full period finds that

T/2 +72
Pug = = Vn en t/ RC gy
Tih oR
= CV'f

for T > RC and f =1/T.

1.2.4 Linear Driver Modeling

When the effects of power supply perturbations are negligible, linear driver models
often provide sufficient accuracy for significant work in signal integrity simulations.
Any nonlinear circuit can be linearized and represented as a Thevenin equivalent
circuit. To model a driver with equal pull-up and pull-down output impedances as
a Thevenin equivalent, the Thevenin source voltage is assigned the driver's output
voltage swing and slew rate, while the Thevenin impedance is assigned the driver's
output impedance. For example, if a driver can swing a given load from OV to 5V
in 2ns, then the Thevenin source voltage is assigned a linear independent voltage
source swinging from OV to 5V in 2ns. The Thevenin impedance is a resistance
equal to the output impedance of the driver at a strategic point, such as halfway
through transition. The resulting driver model is shown in Figure 1.10.

The voltage swing is generally well known, especially for CMOS, which swings
from rail to rail. The appropriate edge rate depends on the loading and may need

[PAGE 38]
24 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

R

Figure 1.10. Thevenin equivalent circuit of a nonlinear driver having equal pull-up

and pull-down output impedance under the condition of no power supply variation.

modification as the load changes. A given driver may have substantially different

edge rates when driving a long transmission line versus a large capacitive load.

1.2.5 Receivers

The primary function of the receiver is to detect the logic level of an analog waveform
in the presence of noise. The receiver may also need to adjust voltage levels from the
external interface to the internal core logic. A common problem here is adapting
full-swing 5V or 3.3V CMOS levels to core voltages of less than 2V, a situation
that creates reliability issues for gate oxides. Receivers are usually integrated with
ESD structures and may be integrated with drivers to form I/O buffers. Receivers
may need to include JTAG boundary scan circuits! to facilitate board-level testing.
Finally, receivers must perform all of these duties while meeting specifications for
delay, power consumption, and logic threshold variation, which contributes to skew.

From a signal integrity point of view, receivers can be classified as either singleended, differential, or pseudo-differential. For single-ended receivers, the input voltage is compared to local ground to determine the output state. Differential receivers

have two inputs that are compared using a differential amplifier to determine output

1. Boundary scan circuits added to components enable board-level testing of complex systems
at low cost. Work by the Joint European Test Action Group (JETAG) and the Joint Test Action
Group (JTAG) in North America led to a procedure standardized by IEEE Std 1149.1-1990, IEEE

Standard Access Port and Boundary-Scan Architecture.

[PAGE 39]
25

Section 1.2. Signaling Standards and Logic Families

Yop
Vop weak
Vin Vout Vin Vout
Vss weak
Ws
(a) (b)

Figure 1.11. CMOS inverter-based single-ended receivers: (a) simple inverter, (b)

inverter with feedback.

state. A pseudo-differential receiver has a fully differential receiver with one input
tied to a reference voltage.

Single-ended receivers are the simplest to implement, requiring fewest transistors and least silicon area, with low power consumption. However, these receivers
are sensitive to common-mode noise such as EMI and SSN. Inverters are a common
method of implementation, and Figure 1.11 shows a CMOS inverter plus an implementation with feedback, which consists of a weak inverter that helps pull the input
to the power rails to limit power consumption and to avoid metastability. Feedback
slows the receiver by fighting the change in logic transition. Inverters introduce considerable skew because the logic trip point is difficult to control and is dependent
on process and temperature variations.

Differential receivers accept two out-of-phase inputs and subtracts them to ob-

tain a clean waveform for level detection, and a couple of topologies are shown in

[PAGE 40]
26 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

Vpp
Vpp O

Vss d

(a) (b)

Figure 1.12. Two circuit topologies for implementing differential receivers.

Figure 1.12. Many sources of noise inject a common noise waveform onto all signal
lines, so the ability of differential receivers to reject common-mode noise allows differential systems to operate to much higher frequencies than single-ended systems.
In addition, differential current-mode drivers minimize the amount of noise injected
into the system in the first place. Differential receivers also have more stable trip
points for less skew. Differential receivers require biasing currents that are always
on, So power dissipation is relatively high. Combined with the fact that differential
signaling doubles the pin count compared to single-ended signaling, the costs of
differential can be high. For this reason, differential signaling is often used on clocks
to reduce jitter while remaining signals use single-ended drivers and receivers to
minimize power dissipation and costs. However, the number of power and ground
connections can be reduced with differential because SSN is far less of a concern.

Pseudo-differential signaling is a cross between single-ended and differential sig-

[PAGE 41]
Section 1.2. Signaling Standards and Logic Families 27

a OUT

IN ___
IN ___

(a) (b)

Figure 1.13. Differential amplifier used as a receiver: (a) fully differential, (b)

pseudo-differential with reference voltage.

naling. As shown in Figure 1.13, one input of a fully differential receiver is tied to
an externally supplied reference voltage. The reference voltage allows the receiver
trip point to be adjusted as needed to enhance signal integrity. However, it can be

difficult to supply a clean reference voltage in a noisy package environment.

Noise Immunity

Any signal applied to a receiver must have sufficient width and amplitude for the
receiver to recognize the input. Narrow voltage spikes, or glitches, arise from several
sources: slight timing variations through combinational logic, switching noise, and
constructive interference. The ability of a receiver to ignore noise spikes is called
receiver noise immunity. In general, narrower pulses require more amplitude to trip
the receiver, and faster logic families are more sensitive to a given spike than are
slower families.

Receiver noise immunity can be computed or measured once a suitable definition
has been defined. For example, the noise passed through a receiver could be required
to not exceed some value, such as s0mV, or the requirement could be that the noise
does not set a latch. Tests should be performed over corners and receiver loading.
A simple example is shown in Figure 1.14 for a 3.3V inverter-based receiver with
feedback, using 50mV as the maximum allowed feedthrough noise. For wide pulses,
the maximum pulse height is near the trip point of 3.3/2=1.65V, but as the pulse
narrows below 1ns, more amplitude is needed to fail the 50mV criteria. For pulse

widths below 0.1ns, the pulse amplitude must exceed the 3.3V supply voltage.

[PAGE 42]
28 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

Measurement

----

Receiver Inverter Inverter

Pulse Height, H, V

Safe Operation Region

(Measurement < 50 mV) Peak Measurement = 50 mV

0.01 0.1 I 10
Pulse Width, W, ns

Figure 1.14. Example noise immunity curve showing the dependence of transmit-

ted noise on pulse width and height.

1.2.6 Receiver Modeling

While detailed models of drivers are required to obtain accurate simulations of signal integrity, the same is not true for receivers. Signal integrity analyses are typically
concerned with computing measures of signal quality, such as eye diagrams, up to
the input of the receiver. Receivers clean up signals, so their outputs are not good
measures of signal quality. Coming into a receiver, a signal encounters the ESD protection circuits, gate capacitance of the input FET, and any integral termination
resistance. Therefore, an adequate receiver model consists of ESD diodes, capacitance, and resistance (if any). In particular, the ESD diodes are important because

they can clip large excursions above and below the power supply rails.

1.3 Interconnects

Digital systems utilize baseband signaling, so the interconnect must be able to carry
a DC component. Therefore, two conductors are required, and interconnects provide

the electrical connection between devices by providing a current path to carry signals

[PAGE 43]
29

Section 1.3. Interconnects

Coax

Microstrip
w
@ 0
Embedded Dual Stripline Twisted Pair

Microstrip

Figure 1.15. Several common types of transmission line.

and a return path to close the loop." In high-speed signaling, the configuration of
these two wires becomes very important, and the return path must be treated as
carefully as the signal wire. Interconnects are usually referred to by function, such
as packages, sockets, connectors, PCBs and many others.

If the cross section of an interconnect does not change along its length, then
the interconnect forms a transmission line, which has special properties allowing
more detailed modeling with less effort. Although the terminology is redundant,
transmission lines are often referred to as having controlled impedance. Interconnects
that are not transmission lines are often referred to as nonuniform transmission
lines. Several common transmission line types are sketched in Figure 1.15. Microstrip
and stripline are most used on PCBs, where microstrips are naturally formed by
traces routed over planes and striplines naturally occur for traces routed between
planes in a multilayer stackup. If two routing layers are allocated between planes,
then dual stripline results, where the two layers are often routed orthogonally to
minimize crosstalk. Connections between subassemblies are often made with coax
and twisted pair. Twisted pair is particularly convenient for differential signaling.
"2. Clocks and encoded signals (euch as with 8B /10B encoding) have constant DC components

that can be filtered out with capacitive or inductive coupling. Even without the DC component,

two-wire interconnects are still used for their wide bandwidth and low cost.

[PAGE 44]
Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

Figure 1.16. High-performance digital systems, such as this microcomputer motherboard, use many different interconnects. Photograph courtesy of Tyan Computer

Corporation.

Typical high-performance digital systems use many types of interconnects. The
microcomputer motherboard shown in Figure 1.16 uses, among others, two highspeed microprocessor edge connectors (with plenty of bulk charge storage nearby)
at the top, four high-speed memory edge connectors in the center. and multiple
package styles including ball-grid array (BGA) (three are visible) and quad flat
pack (QFP). The motherboard itself is a high-performance multilayer PCB with
controlled-impedance transmission lines. A similar example is the microprocessor
daughtercard in Figure 1.17. Cache memory is available close by to ensure highspeed access. Note the use of extensive meandering of the connections, visible for
the left-hand memory, for improved timing. A few high-speed edge connectors are
shown close up in Figure 1.18.

Packaging for individual dice comes in a variety of styles. A high-end BGA is

shown in Figure 1.19. The die is visible and mounted face down with solder balls

[PAGE 45]
31

Section 1.3. Interconnects

Figure 1.17. A high-performance daughtercard featuring a microprocessor with

high-speed cache memory nearby. Photograph courtesy of Intel Corporation.

Figure 1.18. High-speed edge connectors provide hundreds of compact contacts
with impedance control and low insertion force. Photograph courtesy of Molex In-

corporated.

[PAGE 46]
Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

32

Figure 1.19. A microprocessor packaged in a C4-CBGA. Photograph courtesy of

Motorola, Inc.

(C4). 'The package substrate is multilayer ceramic, hence the acronym CBGA, A
regular array of solder balls on the back side provides for attachment to the PCB.
A less expensive, single-layer BGA is shown in Figure 1.20. The die is encapsulated
in epoxy in the center, and the fine-pitch routing from the die to the solder balls is
visible. The workhorse QFP is shown in Figure 1.21.

A few close-up views of interconnects from a single high-performance line card
are shown in Figures 1.22 through 1.30. A large variety of package, connector. and
socket styles are present on this one card. Note that not all of the components

require modeling as high-speed interconnects,

1.4 Modeling of Digital Systems

The focus of this text is the modeling of digital signals as analog waveforms. At highperformance levels, digital signals require simulation as analog waveforms to capture
the effects of imperfections in the system. All systems require nonideal components

to facilitate construction, including the use of packages, sockets, connectors. and

[PAGE 47]
Section 1.4. Modeling of Digital Systems 33

Figure 1.20. A single-layer BGA. Photograph courtesy of Motorola, Inc.

Figure 1.21. A QFP with bumpers. Photograph courtesy of Motorola, Inc.

[PAGE 48]
34 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

| Hail

it i

16680

<<
hat
oe
©
~
- <4
i)

eeeeeda

iv

oo
i)
™
~
a
">
©
i
o>
7
wo

co
oO
--
">
ome
a.
(=)

975

Figure 1.22. The plastic BGA, or PBGA, on the left uses a fine-pitch substrate
with wiring density much higher than the PCB. A small leadcount J-lead QFP is

mounted just to the right of the PBGA.

Figure 1.23. An angled view of the same packages from the prior photo shows the
height difference between the packages. 'lhe solder balls on the BGA are just visible

below the substrate.

[PAGE 49]
35
Section 1.4. Modeling of Digital Systems

Figure 1.25. High-performance systems require many packaging styles. This pho-

tograph shows a gull-wing QFP (lower right), a J-lead QFP (lower left), and a BGA

(top).

[PAGE 50]
Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

RE |
born

"Hae hae pes

J, ae

3LN31¥d
AGOSS9LDd
HYOEL6S @

ca
™~

Sel

i) SSeeanue~

2

--, «
At=.<se eee

Figure 1.26. A gull-wing QFP with bumpers to protect the leads is mounted in

the upper left. A high-speed connector is mounted on the right

j
ioe j

nes cise
a
chi Ge
Ciee mB

0 hie M

Clete wn

. ch

+k ¢- game

Rel (se
th Me

' Cis REO

tn 2
Ciel avs

Kamae. putin er :
otto x | |. Re hia
ee N

ef wo

iii

,

Figure 1.27. On the left side of the QFP, two of the traces are meandered to

equalize the line lengths for improved timing.

[PAGE 51]
i 37
Section 1.4. Modeling of Digital Systems i

Figure 1.28. Iligh-speed parts require many bypass capacilors to minimize rail
collapse. This photograph shows the capacitors mounted on the back side of the

PCB opposite a BGA.

Figure 1.29. The part in the lower right corner is socketed. If the I/O on the
part are sufficiently fast, then package and socket models are required in system

simulations.

<= LL ee

[PAGE 52]
Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

Figure 1.30. Trace routing is usually constrained to 45° increments. Notice the

large size of the vias and how they limit routing density.

tight packing. A prototypical system is shown in Figure 1.31, which demonstrates
the major points of interest.

A full simulation of the prototypical system requires models of the Significant
components: packages, sockets, connectors. PCBs, capacitors, drivers, and receivers.
Of course, each model must be a standalone implementation of the proper physics
(bandwidth, frequency dependence, coupling, and so on), but in addition. all of the
models must work together properly. A variety of component styles must be accommodated. Figure 1.31 also represents a most basic, but often overlooked. feature
of digital system simulation: signals are interpreted only at the silicon dice with
respect to their local power supply.

Most of the effort in assembling a detailed simulation of a complex digital system
is in constructing and/or obtaining suitable models. It is especially difficult to obtain adequate package and socket models because of the difficulty in characterizing
components with large leadcounts. Comunonly, simple models involving one or a few
leads are widely available. but these are useful only under limited circumstances. It

can also be difficult to obtain good driver and receiver models. The IBIS standard

[PAGE 53]
Expansion Cards

a
FL, Packaged Chip

Bypass
Capacitor Cretan i;
Edge Connector
El A Sod

Packaged Chip Direct Chip Multilayer PCB
Attach

Figure 1.31, Prototypical digital system with components needing modeling,

[PAGE 54]
40 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

provides for a good set of voltage-current relationships to describe drivers and receivers, and most manufacturers provide data in IBIS format. The catch is that the
data must be well-implemented in the circuit simulator being used for the digital
simulation.

Once the system model is complete, detailed simulation can be performed to
investigate the performance of signals from silicon to silicon. Performance tradeoffs
can be examined to verify operation and/or to converge the design towards an

optimal solution.

1.4.1 Analog Quality of Digital Waveforms

Interconnects degrade the quality of digital signals through several effects. Interconnect capacitance must be charged or discharged at every logic transition, causing
slower edge rates, higher current draw, and increased power consumption. Interconnect inductance introduces voltage offsets due to the time-rate of change of the
current, causing slower edge rates, non-monotonic level transitions, delay, and potential logic level violations. Interconnect capacitance and inductance together form
transmission lines that introduce delay due to finite propagation speed and to voltage plateaus. Interconnect resistance can become important for short rise/fall times
and/or for long interconnects by rounding off edges, damping noise, and reducing
crosstalk.

Waveforms in a digital system are time-varying voltages and currents just as in
any other electronic system, but with the special properties that they are principally
intended to switch from one logic level to another. The effects of Interconnects and
parasitics are determined by the rate of change of either voltage for capacitive effects
or current for inductive effects. High-speed digital systems imply fast edge rates (or
slew) on logic transitions, so significant parasitic effects can arise from remarkably
smal! capacitances and inductances. Ever-faster digital systems imply disruptive
effects for ever-smailler parasitic components.

Accurate prediction of high-speed digital systems requires good modeling of the

power distribution system and the signaling interconnects. Since all waveforms are

[PAGE 55]
Section 1.4. Modeling of Digital Systems Al

je Settling --»|
Overshoot Time

va ra " ~ N eo
rt x

Ringing

Undershoot

Non-Monotonic
-2~ Transition

Voltage

Monotonic
Transition

Overshoot

Time

Figure 1.32. Detailed appearance of a digital waveform with several common ana-

log defects.

analog in nature and can be of poor quality, analog simulations are required and
SPICE and SPICE-like simulators are very commonly used. The analog appearance
of a digital waveform is sketched in Figure 1.32. Overshoot and undershoot occur
due to impedance mismatch between the driver and transmission line, crosstalk between signal lines, ground and power bounce due to device packaging, and multiple
reflections. Plateaus are common for longer interconnects and can introduce added
delay depending on where the signal is sampled. After simulation, the analog waveform is examined for violations of the logic signaling specification and for excessive
delay. In addition, some control circuits require that the signal switch between logic
levels in a monotonic fashion to prevent double clocking.

The deviation of a waveform from its ideal shape can be thought of as superimposed noise. Noise, in this context, describes unwanted voltage or current deviations.
In contrast, the usual use of the term involves random processes, such as 1/F noise
and thermal noise in semiconductor devices. In digital systems, imperfect waveforms
are repeatable and hence deterministic. Good circuit models can accurately predict

the deterministic noise in the system.

[PAGE 56]
42 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

1.4.2. Modeling, Frequency Content, and Bandwidth

One of the more critical aspects of modeling is ensuring that the model is accurate
over a sufficient bandwidth. Lumped models are simplest and can be used when the
physical dimensions of the component are small compared to the wavelength at the
highest frequency of interest. When this is the case, the lumped approximation is
said to hold, or that the component is electrically small or has short electrical length.
When the lumped approximation is not applicable, wideband modeling is required
and the component is said to be electrically large or has long electrical length. For
example, surface mount resistors can be modeled as lumped elements well into the
GHz range. On the other hand, a long interconnect on a PCB cannot be treated as
lumped. Lumped models are preferred when applicable, since wideband modeling
is considerably more complex.

Bandwidth requirements depend on the shape of the time-domain waveform,
where sharp edges and corners require more bandwidth than smooth waveforms.
Since it is impossible to know beforehand the precise waveform that will be encountered, rules of thumb must be used to estimate bandwidth needs. Digital waveforms
tend to fall into two categories. For unterminated TTL and CMOS signaling, charging of parasitic and load capacitances tend to result in waveforms with exponential
edges due to RC charging. For terminated signaling, such as ECL and LVDS, the
waveforms tend towards a trapezoidal shape. Bandwidth requirements of both cases
are covered below. In addition, bandwidth requirements are estimated from a simple
RC interconnect. All three derivations lead to similar requirements.

Once the required bandwidth is identified, a modeling strategy can be developed
and implemented. In many situations, such as for packages, sockets, and connectors, lumped models are completely appropriate. In others, wideband models are
required. The job of the analyst is to define the important physical effects that
must be captured by the model and then to construct a model that satisfies those
requirements. In addition to bandwidth, frequency dependence and coupling play a
major role in modeling. The level of complexity rises rapidly as additional physical

effects are added.

[PAGE 57]
Section 1.4. Modeling of Digital Systems 43

Trapezoidal Edges

For circuits with little capacitance, such as fast terminated nets, digital signals
can have edges that are nearly trapezoidal. Consider the pulse train shown in Fig-

ure 1.33, where the falling edge is given by
Twtt _ +
v(t) = a Vo.

Because the pulse train is periodic and even, it can be written as the Fourier series

= 2an
v(t) =a, + San cos (= t) ;

n=l

where

9 T/2
ao = z/ u(t)dt
0

and

Figure 1.33. Pulse train with trapezoidal edges set up for even symmetry.

[PAGE 58]
44 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

Ixxecuting the integrals yields the complete result as

T ~~ sin (naTw /T) sin (ntr/T) 2mn
v(t) = Vo (14050 Salat Sorel, ( 7 ')). (1.2)

The power spectrum is a plot of the squared magnitude of each frequency component
of the signal. Since the amplitude of each frequency component. cos (= t) at the
radian frequency wp, = 22 is set by two sinc functions (sinc(z) = sin(x)/x), the
sinc function defines the spectrum of the waveform. While wy, is actually discrete,
it is convenient for discussion to let it assume continuous values.

The generic sinc function and its spectrum are plotted in Figure 1.34. The spectrum is 3dB down when z = 0.44257 and rolls off at 20dB /decade (6dB/octave).
The first. sine in (1.2) rolls off the spectrum at 2.78/Ty with 20dB/decade, while
the second rolls it off at 2.78/7 with an additional 20dB/decade for a total of
40dB/decade. The envelope of the spectrum for (1.2) is shown in Figure 1.35. Since
T < Ty, the rolloff in the spectrum associated with the edge rate is higher in frequency than that for the pulse width. Therefore, bandwidth considerations must be
based on the edge rate rather than on the pulse width.

At the corner frequency, the spectrum is only 3dB down. To accurately model the
pulse edge, more bandwidth is required. With a rolloff of 40dB /decade, an additional
12dB can be gained in only one octave. The radian bandwidth requirement for

modeling a trapezoidal pulse train is then
Wr omin = 5.56/r, (1.3)

or in terms of frequency, fnymin = 0.885/7r. Given the approximate nature of the
needed additional bandwidth, a good rule of thumb for the required bandwidth is
fnymin = 1/7.

The number of harmonics can be computed by replacing w,, with its original
definition as 27n/T in ( 1.3). Solving for n yields

n= 0.8852.
T

[PAGE 59]
i 45
Section 1.4. Modeling of Digital Systems

sin(x)
X

20 log

0.0 0.11 Ix 10x 106n

(b)

Figure 1.34. The generic sinc function: (a) plot, (b) power spectrum.

For a typical edge rate of T/7 = 10, about nine harmonics are required. For this
edge rate, the plots in Figure 1.36 show that 10 harmonics is reaching the point of diminishing returns, while the lower numbers of included harmonics create significant
overshoot and edge rate error.

As a simple example, consider a System operating with a 100MHz clock and

with data transitions on the rising edge of the clock. The clock period is 10ns. If the

[PAGE 60]
46 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

-20dB/decade

-40dB/decade

Spectrum

On

Figure 1.35. Envelope of the spectrum for the trapezoidal pulse train in Figure 1.33.

Voltage, V

Figure 1.36. Trapezoidal pulse train with Tw = 0.57 and T/r = 10 reconstructed

from its Fourier series with the number of harmonics varying from 3 to 20.

[PAGE 61]
Section 1.4. Modeling of Digital Systems AT

rising and falling times of the waveforms are designed at 20% of the period, then

t; = 2ns. The required bandwidth for any circuit mode] is 1/2 x 10~-° = 500MHz.

Exponential Edges

Due to the RC time constant of charging capacitive loads, digital signals often have

exponential edges. Consider the isolated pulse defined by

0, t<0

Vo ore: 0<t<T/2
v(t) = J--e 8 -T/2}

Uo (1 "> im} ' T/2 <t<T

0, t

where the parameter a sets the sharpness of the rising and falling edges, and T is
the total pulse width. The rise/fall times are directly related to a but not through
a simple formula. Several pulses with vu, = T' = 1 are superimposed in Figure 1.37

for a few 10% to 90% rise times.

10-90 Rise/Fall Time

0.35T
0.26T
0.147
0.069T
0.034T
0.017T
0.0086T
0.0043T

Voltage, V

Time

Figure 1.37. Exponential pulse with a 50% duty cycle for several 10% to 90%

rise/fall times.

[PAGE 62]
48 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

A Fourier transform pair can be defined by
F(qw) = f f(the" dt (1.4)
and
f(t) = af. F(qw)e'* dw. (1.5)

The Fourier transform pair is denoted symbolically as F (jw) = F[f(t)] and f(t) =
F~"|F(gw)]. The power spectrum of a time-domain waveform is defined as the
magnitude squared of the Fourier transform. Using (1.4). the spectrum of each
waveform in Figure 1.37 is plotted in dB in Figure 1.38. where it. is easily observed
in Figure 1.38a that faster rise/fall times lead directly to stronger high-frequency
components. In Figure 1.38b the envelopes of several of the spectra are plotted to
demonstrate that to capture frequency components down to a given level (30dB in
the figure), more bandwidth is required for faster edges.

To estimate the bandwidth required to accurately represent the exponential
pulses, the spectra are truncated at several bandwidths, then inverse transformed
using (1.5). For a rise/fall time of 0.147, these various representations of the original
waveform are plotted in Figure 1.39. The plot shows that excellent shape is achieved
for bandwidths exceeding 4/t,, where t, is the rise/fall time. Good waveform shape
is achieved for bandwidths as low as 1/t,. The rectangular window used in this
analysis is conservative since interconnects act as low-order, low-pass filters. For

the bulk of interconnect work, bandwidths of 1 /t, are adequate.

RC Filter

A common signaling scenario is a short, unterminated transmission line, which can
be modeled with the simple RC circuit in Figure 1.40. The driver is modeled as
a linear circuit with resistance R, while the load is purely capacitive and modeled

with capacitance C'. The voltage across the capacitor for a unit step input is

vo(t) = u(t) (1 - eFC) (1.6)

[PAGE 63]
aoe A9
Section 1.4. Modeling of Digital Systems

Spectrum, dB

0.01 0.] 1 10 100

Frequency, Hz

(a)

Decreasing Rise Time

Increasing
Bandwidth

10-90 Rise/Fali Time

Spectrum, dB
we
rao)

-40 1 0.35T
2 0.26T
3 0.14T
"30 4 0.069T
5 0.034T
-60
0.01 0.1 1 10 100

Frequency, Hz
(b)

Figure 1.38. (a) Power spectra of the exponential pulses in Figure 1.37. Note that
the waveforms with shorter rise times (sharper edges) have stronger high-frequency
components. (b) Envelopes for the spectra in (a) show that more bandwidth is
required to capture frequency components with values above a given level (-30dB

here) as the edges become sharper.

[PAGE 64]
50 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

1.2

0.8
0.6

0.4

Voltage, Ohms

0.2

-0.2
0.6 -04 -02 0 02 04 06 08 1 #12 #14 «16

Time

Figure 1.39. Reconstruction of a pulse after rectangular windowing of its spectrum
shows that frequency components above 4/t, are not needed for high accuracy.

Acceptable accuracy can be achieved with as little bandwidth as 1 /tr.

+ +
V, (t) C Volt)

Figure 1.40. Simple RC circuit for estimation of bandwidth in interconnects.

[PAGE 65]
Section 1.4. Modeling of Digital Systems 5]

For t > 0, the time for a given voltage is
t(vo) = --RC In(i --_ Uo).

The 10% to 90% rise time is then

1--0.1
1---0.9

t, = ¢(0.9) -- t(0.1) = RCIn ( ) = 2.197RC.

The delay to the 50% point is
ta = (0.5) = --RC In(1 -- 0.5) = 0.69RC.

Note that tg 4 t,/2 since the waveform is much steeper (and so more prone to cause
noise) at the start of the transition than it is at the end.

The differential equation for an arbitrary input waveform for the circuit in Figure 1.40 is

du,(t)

dt 1 ve

ui (t) = RC

Taking the Fourier transform and solving for the transfer function yields

_ Fleo(t)]
Flui(t)]
]
~ J + qwRC'

A(w)

so the power spectrum is

1
|H(w)|* = 1+ WRC)?"
| (w)|? = 1 while (WRC)? < 1 but drops to 1 /2, the -3dB half-power point, at the
corner frequency defined by (w3qa3 RC)? = 1. RC can be eliminated using the 10%
to 90% rise time to obtain

2.197
W3dB = ;
ty

which in terms of frequency is

0.35
fsaB = ra

[PAGE 66]
52 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

The 3dB bandwidth is not nearly adequate to model the RC charging waveform.
The transfer function (1.7) is a one-pole response that decays at 10dB/decade or
6dB/octave. An additional two octaves of bandwidth gains 12dB of spectrum, im-

plying a bandwidth requirement of
1.4

BW = --
ty
which is similar to the bandwidth requirements derived in the prior two sections.

In general, bandwidths of 1/t, or more are required for interconnect simulations.

1.4.3. Process Variations

To ensure that performance targets are met over a range of operating conditions
and component tolerances, simulations should be repeated with adjusted models and
power supply values. Semiconductor device performance varies with processing, and
performance is usually modeled as best-case (BCS), worst-case (WCS) and typical
(TYP). In addition, performance varies with temperature, which ranges from low to
nominal to high. Power supplies always specify a variation about the nominal output
voltage. Printed circuit boards and lumped passive components have tolerances
and sometimes temperature-dependent resistance. Combining and simulating all
possible combinations is practical only for small-scale simulations.

One method to reduce the number of required simulations is to define process corners to bound the performance of the system. For example, a two-corner
simulation could be based with one corner on low-temperature BCS silicon, highimpedance transmission lines, high-power supply voltage, and small capacitor and
resistor values. This corner covers the fast system using fast silicon with least capacitive loading and shortest RC charging times. The other corner would be the opposite:
high-temperature WCS silicon at low voltage with low-impedance transmission lines
and large resistances. Corners based on process, voltage, and temperature variations
are often referred to as PVT corners.

Process corners should not be invariant rules. Different circuits can require dif-

ferent corners. In practice, best-case and worst-case corners can be too pessimistic,

[PAGE 67]
Section 1.4. Modeling of Digital Systems 53

causing overly conservative designs. Product performance in the field can be used

to adjust the corners accordingly.

1.4.4 Challenges for Modeling High-Speed Systems

For sufficiently slow clock and slew rates, the effects of interconnects can be incorporated through their capacitive loading on drivers. As clock rates increase,
transmission line effects begin and significant voltages appear on small parasitics.
For simulation, high speed means that that transmission line and parasitic models
are required to achieve good accuracy.

Simulations of high-speed systems require models of all components, and these
models must capture all of the significant physical effects: frequency dependence,
losses, coupling, delay, and parasitic circuit effects. Models can be constructed
through analytical analysis, measurement, and/or simulation.

Analytical models can be quite suitable in many instances; however, they carry
the significant risk of poor application, and mistakes can lead to serious simulation
errors. In the modeling of interconnects, packaging, and sockets, the formulas for
partial inductance are particularly susceptible to misapplication. The primary limitation of analytical modeling is the lack of formulas because most problems are too
complex.

Measurements of interconnects are difficult for a couple of reasons. First, the
parasitic values are often very small. For example, in packages and sockets the connections to be characterized are intentionally designed to be good short circuits.
Small parasitic values can still lead to significant voltage levels. For instance, 80pH
of power supply inductance in a microprocessor package can lead to high noise
levels because microprocessors can draw current at the rate of several A/ns. Second, interconnects often involve large numbers of ports that must be characterized.
For example, a 100-lead QFP nominally requires 20,100 two-port swept-frequency
measurements for a full characterization. Shortcuts and approximations are often
required.

Simulations of interconnects can be difficult if the problem size exceeds the ca-

[PAGE 68]
54 Digital Systems and Signaling Chapter 1

pacity of the simulator, the operating system, or the computer. Electromagnetic
simulation is often required in some form, and these are usually resource intensive. Just as for measurements, shortcuts and approximations are often required.
For example, 2D simulations require far less resources than 3D simulations, so long
as interconnects can be approximated as transmission lines and analyzed in 2D
to obtain per-unit-length resistance, inductance, and capacitance values. Unfortunately, it can require considerable skill and experience to deploy a suitable range of
electromagnetic techniques (and can be expensive, too).

Simulations over corners can be difficult due to the need to manage models,
schematics, and simulation results. Often, models over corners are unavailable.

Finally, even if a full interconnect model is produced, a circuit simulation must
successfully run with the model. Interconnect models can easily overwhelm a circuit simulator. For example, the partial inductance matrix alone of a 100-lead QFP
requires 5,050 elements in a SPICE simulation. Specialized simulations can be performed that enable the interconnect models to be reduced to small and manageable
levels,

In summary, the job of the signal integrity analyst is very challenging because the
specialization cuts across so much of the field of electrical engineering. Significant expertise is required in digital systems concepts; analog circuit behavior; analog circuit
simulation; driver and receiver design; electromagnetic simulation; lumped modeling; transmission line theory; multiconductor transmission lines and interconnects;
the physics of resistance, inductance, and capacitance; frequency-domain analysis;
time-domain analysis; and potentially, laboratory techniques and microwave theory

for characterizing very small parasitics and large leadcount interconnects.

[PAGE 69]
Chapter 2

SIGNAL INTEGRITY

Digital systems rely on signaling from drivers to receivers to pass information between their components. Reliable signaling is achieved when the signaling specifications are met under full adverse noise conditions as well as device behavior variations
due to both process deviations in device manufacturing and normal changes over
the operating temperature. A breakdown in communication leads to glitches where
unintended or incorrect data is transferred, a situation called false signaling.
Critical data paths within systems often contain safeguards against false signaling, and the primary system for this is data redundancy through parity. Parity can
enable the system to detect small-scale signaling failures, while an error correction
scheme can be optionally included to correct data faults detected using parity information. However, parity and error correction cannot be relied upon to make a
noisy system stable and reliable. In addition, it is often not practical in terms of
cost or performance to include parity and error correction on every circuit.
Superimposed on the desired signals are unwanted waveforms (i.e., noise) generated from many sources. The principal sources are crosstalk, impedance mismatch,
simultaneous switching noise, and multiple reflections. Each can be independently
characterized to facilitate an understanding of the mechanisms that degrade signal
quality and to help guide design decisions. In real systems, all act simultaneously
and require detailed circuit simulation to obtain good estimates of the total wave-

form on each signal line.

55

[PAGE 70]
56 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

2.1 Transmission Lines

A transmission line is a two-conductor interconnect (so that it can carry signal
frequency components down to DC) that is long compared to the conductor cross
section and uniform along its length. Because many interconnects are dominated
by long runs over unbroken ground planes (to minimize radiation and EMI susceptibility), they can be accurately modeled as transmission lines, and much of signal
integrity analysis is based on them.

If a short length of a transmission line is considered, then the lumped approximation applies and the transmission line can be modeled, as shown in Figure 2.1,
with series resistance and inductance and with shunt capacitance and conductance.

Applying Kirchhoff's voltage law around the loop, then

di(z, t)

v(z + Az, t) -- o(z, t) = --Ri(z,t) --L Ti (2.1)
Similarly, Kirchhoff's current law applied at z+ Az yields
d Az,t
i(z + Az,t) --i(z,t) = --Go(z + Az, t) cM tant) (2.2)

Divide through by Az and let Az -- 0, then (2.1) and (2.2) transform from difference

equations to the differential equations

. R L .
i(Z,t) i(z + Az,t)
fom WW, a"
v(z,t) --=--C 2 G v(z +Az,t)
a
Z Z+ AZ

Figure 2.1. Lumped model of a short length of a transmission line.

[PAGE 71]
Section 2.1. Transmission Lines 57

Ov(z,t) Oi(z, t)
a --ri(z,t) -- (-- (2.3)
and
Oi(z,t) Ov(z, t)
Oz _ --gv(z, t) 7e Ot ) (2.4)

where the lumped component values transition to the per-unit-length quantities r,
é, c, and g due to normalization by Az. Simultaneous solution of the transmission
line equations (2.3) and (2.4) yields the voltage and current at any point on the

transmission line.

2.1.1 Time-Domain Solution

Transmission lines for digital signaling often have low losses. For example, the effect
of half an Ohm of loss on a 502 transmission line driven with a 50 driver is negligible for most applications. To facilitate investigations of the effects of various system
imperfections on signal integrity, losses will be neglected. The lossless transmission

line equations are recovered from (2.3) and (2.4) by setting r = g = 0 yielding

dv(z,t) _ _,dil2,#) (2.5)

Oz Ot
and

Oi(z,t) -----_ Ov(z,t)
ae (2.6)

An important property of the lossless transmission line is that pulses propagate
undistorted along the length of the line. Consider an arbitrary waveform such as the
one in Figure 2.2, where the wave shape is described by the function f(r) with 7 an
independent variable. Since there are no losses and no frequency dependence to @ or
c, the waveform must move down the line unchanged in shape (see section 2.1.3 for
a proof) and can be described mathematically by f(z,t) = f(r) = f(z --vt), where

7 =z---vt. A maximum or minimum of the waveform occurs when 07 /0t = 0, so

OT _ 9 a %_
a 06)6hUdtS

[PAGE 72]
58 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

f(t)

Figure 2.2. Arbitrary waveform for propagation down a transmission line.

or
dz
dt'

indicating that the maximum or minimum point is moving in the +z direction with

velocity v.

The partial derivatives in (2.5) and (2.6) can be rewritten in terms of 7 by noting

that
Oo _ O07 _ I We= vi) _ A
Oz OrO0z Or Oz OF
and
O_O _ oO
Ot Ordt ar'
then
Ov(T) _, Oi(r)
a7 tv 7 (2.7)
and
Oi(T) _ Ov(T)
ar a (2.8)
Eliminating our) between (2.7) and (2.8) and cancelling Ou(r) yields
a (2.9)

[PAGE 73]
Section 2.1. Transmission Lines 59

so the velocity of an arbitrary pulse can be directly computed from the per-unitlength inductance and capacitance of the transmission line. Integrating (2.7) with
respect to 7 while assuming that no static charge is on the transmission line (so

that the integration constant vanishes), then

where (2.9) is used. Therefore, the voltages and currents of an arbitrary waveform

on a lossless transmission line are in phase and related by the impedance

2-5
Cc

called the characteristic impedance of the transmission line.
For a transmission line of length d, the time for a wave to travel the length of

the line is called the delay or the time of flight (TOF) and can be computed as
TOF = dvee. (2.10)

The lossless transmission line is completely specified by its characteristic impedance

and delay. Note that

l= Z,-- 2.11
; (2.11)
and
1 TOF
= ----. 2.12
Cc" 74 (2.12)

The analyses can be repeated with 7 = z+ vt with identical results, except that
the waveform travels in the --z direction with velocity v = 1/V@c and the voltage

and current are related by
u(T) = --Zi(r).

Effective Dielectric Constant

Since the TOF can be found given the length of a transmission line and the velocity

of a wave on it, the velocity is often the unknown parameter that must be found.

[PAGE 74]
60 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

In a transmission line where the electric and magnetic fields are completely encased

in a dielectric with dielectric constant €,, then the velocity is

(2.13)

where c, = 3 x 108m/s is the velocity of a wave in a vacuum (e, = 1) [which is also
called the free-space speed of light]. For transmission lines such as stripline, dual
stripline, embedded microstrip, and coax, the velocity is easily computed once the
dielectric constant of the filler material is known.

When the electric and magnetic fields run through two dielectrics, the wave still
propagates with some velocity. Generalizing (2.13) yields

Co
V €eff

where €eg¢ is an effective dielectric constant. For a transmission line like microstrip,

the two dielectrics are air with e, = 1 and the substrate. The effective dielectric
constant must lie between these two, and since most of the field is below the strip
in the substrate, the effective dielectric constant must be closer to the dielectric
constant of the substrate than to that of air.

Effective dielectric constants are convenient because they offer a handy shortcut
in many situations and can be easily estimated for approximate calculations. For
example, if ¢, = 4 for the substrate in microstrip, then €eg * 3.

For the lossless case, the formulas in (2.11) and (2.12) are easily modified for

the effective dielectric constant to be

Zo e
ga "ovtel (2.14)
Co
and
c= Veet (2.15)
Zolo

2.1.2 Directional Independence

The analysis of lossless transmission lines can be carried further to show that two

waveforms traveling in opposite directions do not interact. Let vt denote a voltage

[PAGE 75]
Section 2.1. Transmission Lines 61

waveform launched in the +z direction, while v~ indicates one traveling in the --z
direction. Due to the linearity of Maxwell's equations, and assuming linear materials,

the total voltage must be the superposition of these two, so
v(z,t) = vt (z--vt) +0 (z+ v1). (2.16)

The total current is then

1 1
i(z,t) = Zz (z-- vt) -- Zz (z+ vt). (2.17)
Substituting these expressions into (2.5) and (2.6) yields
Out n Ov- ---- & Avt n £ Ov-
Oz dz = Zy Ot Zo Ot
and
Ovt Ov Out Ovu--
Ce 8 eZ eZ
Oz Oz OE OOF
Adding these two results in
Out 1/é vt 1/¢€ Ovu--
nr) (Z + Zn) a) (Z Zo) at
while subtracting provides
Ovu-- 1/é Ovt 1/¢€ Ovu--
a3 (Z-.) oF (q+) OE

These can be further simplified by noting that (+ + Zo) = 2/v while (z - Zo)
= 0, then

aot __ Lav
Oz vy Ot
and
Ov-- 1 Ov~
Oe TD Ot

Note that these two equations are decoupled, with each equation a function only of
ut or v_; therefore, the two waves cannot interact and travel along the transmission
line without influencing each other. The waves interact only at boundaries between
transmission lines with different impedances or between a transmission line and a
component. This property is exploited to facilitate analyses and to construct bounce

diagrams.

[PAGE 76]
62 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

2.1.3. Frequency-Domain Solution

When losses are significant on transmission lines, the frequency domain is convenient for analytic solutions. After Fourier [4] transformation with (1.4), the lossy

transmission line equations in (2.3) and (2.4) become

ves) = --(r + wl) I(z,w) (2.18)
and
ones) =--(g+ywce)V(z,w), (2.19)

where V and J are the Fourier transforms of v and i. Eliminating J from (2.18) and

(2.19) provides the second-order differential equation

OPV

ae (r + gwl)(g + gwe)V = 0. (2.20)

Define y? = (r + ywl)(g + jwe), then
yw) = V(r + o0)(g + goo), (2.21)
and the solution to (2.20) is
V(z,w) = Awe)? + B(w)e™)*, (2.22)

Note in particular that A, B, and ¥ are functions of w. ¥ is called the complex
propagation constant.
The complex propagation constant can always be written in terms of its real

and imaginary parts as
Y(w) = a(w) + 98(w);
then (2.22) becomes

V(z,w) = A(w)e7 0)? e982 + B(w)e®()? 9),

[PAGE 77]
Section 2.1. Transmission Lines 63

The time-domain voltage can then be found using the inverse Fourier transform

given in chapter 1 by (1.5) to obtain

1 CO
f(t) = on (Awe a) 98) + B(w)e)= e19()*) el" du)
1 CO
= --a(w)2 6--3(Bw)z--wt)
an | (Awe e
+ B(w)e)* e1(A(e)=420)) dw, (2.23)

where it can be seen in the second form that the total voltage consists of the superposition of many complex exponentials. Each A(w)e~*)#eI@)2--"») represents
a weighted sinusoidal wave traveling in the +z direction that is attenuated exponentially with distance. A fixed point on the exponential can be identified when
B(w)z -- wt = constant. Solving for z and taking the derivative with respect to time

yields the phase velocity

dz w
Vp = a Blo) (2.24)

Since (@ is a function of frequency, then the phase velocity is a function of frequency.
In a similar fashion, each B(w)e*)7 e(9)2+") represents a weighted and attenuated wave traveling in the --z direction. Due to their roles in wave propagation, a
is called the attenuation constant and £ is called the propagation constant.

The phase velocity and attenuation of the sinusoidal waves are different at every
frequency, so the shape of the time-domain waveform must change as it moves down
the line. Attenuation is stronger for higher-frequency components, so the waveform
tends to spread, or disperse, with distance as low-frequency components take over.
For this reason, the effects of losses on wave shape is called dispersion. Sometimes
dispersion is attributed to the source of the losses, such as conductor loss dispersion
or dielectric loss dispersion.

Because each frequency component has a different phase velocity, the wave ve-

locity is not equal to the phase velocity of any given component. For lossy lines,

[PAGE 78]
64 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

the wave velocity is found by finding the TOF of a pulse between two points and
dividing into the distance traveled.+

The characteristic impedance can be found by solving for I in (2.18) with the
general voltage solution in (2.22) to obtain

I(z,w) = poe * = (Awe -- B(w)e™*) (2.25)

The characteristic impedance for a lossy transmission line is then

r+ r+ jul
Zo(w) = gt que' (2.26)

and it is, in general, frequency-dependent.
The directional components of voltage and current are clearly apparent with a

change of notation in (2.22) to
V(z,w) = Vt (we)? + Vo (wet, (2.27)

then the current from (2.25) is

1

I(z,w) = Za lw)

a (we) -- V~ (wet)? | (2.28)

These two expressions are often a good starting point in solving circuit problems

involving transmission lines.

Low-Loss Transmission Lines

When losses on a transmission line are small, additional mathematical manipulation can yield good insight into waveform propagation on transmission lines. The

complex propagation constant can be rearranged as

y= V(r + jwl)(g + jwe)

= poll + =F )swe(1 +)

= pole 1+ fl + (2.29)

1. For narrow-band signals, the group velocity can be computed from the frequency dependence
of the phase velocity to find the velocity of a wave packet. Digital signals are baseband, so the

group velocity is not applicable since the narrow-band assumption does not apply.

[PAGE 79]
Section 2.1. Transmission Lines 65

For low losses, the approximations

14+ x 1444, 5c
L 2 qwh? L
Fie a an
1+ Jue ~ 1+ 2 ywe? we < 1

can be applied to (2.29) to obtain

wvte(14 5 1 J at)

1* 2qwl 2we 4wle
m jwVTe+ 4 Vert f (2.31)
+ id 9 e co! ' :
rg

where the term + 37, 18 dropped as a negligible second-order small term. The at-

Ww

tenuation and propagation constants for low losses are then given by

(fey) oss

B=uVee, (2.33)

and

and the phase velocity is
1
Vic

Note that the attenuation constant and the phase velocity are frequency-independ-

Vp =

ent, so all frequency components of the waveform travel together with uniform
attenuation. Therefore, the waveform propagates down the transmission line with
no change in wave shape except for reduction in amplitude. In this case, the wave
velocity does equal the phase velocity. This propagation is dispersionless.

Substituting the attenuation and propagation constants in (2.32) and (2.33) for
the low-loss line into (2.23) yields

1 co
f®) = sen | A(w) e722 Ve eb dy
1 co
tee | B(w)e tev ee et dy
7 --oco

= e a(t -- Vélez) + et *0(t + Vecz), (2.34)

[PAGE 80]
66 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

where a(t) = F--'[A(w)] and b(t) = F~'[B(w)]. The time-shifting theorem for

Fourier transforms,

FIf(t-§)] = Fife,

is also utilized. The result in (2.34) generalizes to low-loss lines the directional
independence established in section 2.1.2 for lossless lines. In addition, the result

shows that waveforms travel unchanged except for amplitude on low-loss lines.

Conductor Loss-Dominated Transmission Lines

Losses are often dominated by conductors, so while r is often significant, g is often

not. Setting g = 0 in the lossy expressions for Z, and ¥ yields

z= |r rwe (2.35)
qwe
and
y= VV (rt gwe)jwe. (2.36)

At low frequencies, r >> wf, so

roe
Zo 4/--eIn/4
we

yx Jorcel™/4,

and

For both Z, and +, the real and imaginary parts are equal (ignoring the sign)
with a square root dependency on frequency. These results are very different from
those obtained from the lossless transmission line model, yet the lossless model is
often used in signal integrity work where baseband digital signals include significant
low-frequency content.

An approximate metric is available for determining if lossless transmission line

modeling is appropriate. At low frequencies, the lumped approximation applies,

[PAGE 81]
Section 2.1. Transmission Lines 67

and the lossy transmission line is simply a loop of wire that can be modeled as a
series RLC circuit. For losses to be negligible, the RLC circuit must be strongly

underdamped, a condition that occurs when

/L
2\/--.
R< G

Using per-unit-length quantities for a transmission line with length d, then

2
d< 2 ft (2.37)
r Cc

If the line length is sufficiently short, then lossless transmission line modeling can
be appropriate.

To demonstrate the line length dependence, consider a 500 transmission line
with €e¢ = 3 and 10Q/m of loss. The per-unit-length quantities from (2.14) and
(2.15) are 289nH/m and 115pF/m, respectively. The line length limit from (2.37) is
d < 10m. Simulation results for lossy and lossless versions of this transmission line
are shown in Figure 2.3. The results show that the lossless model is accurate for
line lengths less than 1m, so the prediction from (2.37) works very well for this case.
Board-level signal integrity work deals with lines less than a meter long, so lossless
transmission line modeling can be appropriate if the edge rates are sufficiently slow.
Waveforms with fast edge rates experience significant frequency-dependent losses
due to the skin effect, so frequency-dependent lossy simulations can be required (see
chapter 10, section 10.3).

At high frequencies, r << wé, then

and

In this case, the real part of Z, is constant and dominates the imaginary part,
while for y the imaginary part dominates with a simple linear dependence on frequency. When high-frequency losses are negligible, the characteristic impedance and

propagation constant simplify to that of the lossless transmission line.

[PAGE 82]
68 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

289nH/m

115pF/m
8ns 50Q
1V WA
o 2 \ O 10Q/m Tr SPF
O.Ins_ 0.1ns = or =
0Q/m

Voltage at 5pF Load, V

0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40

Time, ns

Figure 2.3. The accuracy of the lossless transmission line model depends on the

line length.

General Formulas Using Real Math

Without assumptions on r and wf, complex math is required for calculating Z, and
y, so calculator-based calculations using (2.35) and (2.36) are somewhat difficult.
Convenient formulas based only on real math are possible after some manipulation.

First,

[PAGE 83]
Section 2.1. Transmission Lines 69

then the real part is

1 /2 r r
neiZa)= 4/4 (as + fata).

The term in parenthesis can be rearranged as

1 r aha r
Tob Tob

al (i754 frto5)
7 Ie Tol

where the positive root is taken to represent a passive structure. For the imaginary

part of the characteristic impedance,

1 (f/f), ioe
imizal = pl ( I~ jG 1+IF :

The term in parenthesis can be rearranged as

r r
,/l1--j---- /1+j-- =
Too ay)

then

where the negative sign is taken to match up to the low-loss approximation above.

The complex propagation constant can be similarly addressed to find that

[PAGE 84]
70 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

and

Im[y] = 6 = wv ec (14 + (5)'}.

2.1.4 Impedance Boundaries

Waves traveling in opposite directions couple at the interfaces between transmission
lines with different characteristic impedances. Suppose multiple lossless or lossy
transmission lines are cascaded. At the interface between the nth and (n + 1)th
line, the voltage and the current must be continuous. For the voltage,

+ -- _ yt -
Un + Un, = Ung, + Un 4s

while for the current,

Uh Un Unda 7 Un+1
Zon 7 Zon+1
Eliminating v,,,, yields
1 Z 1 Z
+ _ oyn+l + oyn+l _
Unt = 5 (1 + <yst) Un +5 (1 - "yst) Un» (2.38)
while eliminating v;,, finds
_ 1 Zon+1 + 1 Zon+1 _
ten = 5 (1- BS) ot +5 tr Un- (2.39)

The waveforms in both directions on each line are mixed at the boundary, and
waveforms are generated as necessary to fulfill the boundary condition.

For example, if the only wave that exists is vt, after hitting the boundary a

n?
reflected wave

1 _ Zo n41

- + Zon + Zon+1 -- Zon
Un = Un a re = Uy, SO
1+ =e Zon+1 + Zon

is formed according to (2.39), yielding the classic reflection coefficient formula

Un Zo n+1-- Zo n
r=- = om" 2.40
ur Zon+1 + Zo,n (

[PAGE 85]
Section 2.2. Ideal Point-to-Point Signaling 71

Similarly, a transmitted wave is formed according to (2.38), leading to the trans-

mission coefficient

+
pe teet Bons
Un Zon+1 + Zon

Note that v,,, = 0 throughout as it is assumed that the only wave introduced is
+

Uy.

One of the primary techniques for maximizing the quality of signals on an interconnect is to eliminate or minimize the magnitude of impedance discontinuities to
minimize the generation of reflections. When two components of an interconnect,
such as a driver and a transmission line, have the same impedance, then they are

said to be matched and will produce no reflection.

2.2 Ideal Point-to-Point Signaling

Point-to-point signaling can achieve the highest signal quality to support the fastest
clock rates. The basic setup for CMOS signaling is shown in Figure 2.4a, where a
driver signals a receiver through a three-conductor transmission line. The receiver
is represented by capacitive parasitics to both power and ground.

To facilitate discussions on signaling, the setup can be simplified with a few
strong but reasonable assumptions. If the power (Vpp) and ground (Vgs) connections have sufficient bypass capacitance, they can be wired in parallel. In this case,
Vpp is said to be an AC ground. If the driver pulls up and down with equal strength,
it can be linearized and modeled as a Thevenin equivalent circuit. With these assumptions, the schematic in Figure 2.4a can be replaced with that in Figure 2.4b.

Energy injected into the system must be dissipated to prevent it from accumulating as noise. Resistance is required at the source, at the load, or at both. The
driver has some resistance that varies depending on the application. Often, drivers
with very low impedance are used to drive large capacitive loads on short interconnects, such as with memory buses. Higher impedances can be used for lighter

loads or when timing is more relaxed. Reflections at the driver can be minimized

[PAGE 86]
Contents

11.4 Power Distribution
11.4.1 Target Impedance
11.4.2 Design Overview
11.4.3 Capacitor Modeling
11.4.4 PCB Modeling
11.4.5 Core Noise Modeling
11.5 Advanced Packaging

11.6 Exercises

APPENDIX A SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED PROBLEMS

APPENDIX B COAXIAL PEEC CALCULATOR

APPENDIX C SAMPLE SPICE SSN SIMULATIONS

APPENDIX D SAMPLE MODAL DECOMPOSITION CODE

APPENDIX E SAMPLE LAYER PEELING CODE

INDEX

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

403

425

483

493

499

a17

521

035

[PAGE 87]
Section 2.2. Ideal Point-to-Point Signaling 73

edge rates, the cases of source plus parallel termination and of source termination

alone are considered.

2.2.1 Fast and Slow Edges

Generally, there are two situations to consider. For slow rise times, the transmitted
wave has sufficient time to reflect off the load and return to the driver before the
driver has completed its transition. The load then modifies the impedance seen by
the driver and affects its switching characteristics. In other words, the driver "feels"
the load while it switches. For this situation to occur, the edge rate must be greater
than twice the TOF.

For fast rise times with edge rates less than twice the TOF, the driver completes its transition before any of the transmitted wave can reflect from the load
and return. During the logic transition, the driver sees only the transmission line's
characteristic impedance. In this situation, the loading does not affect the driver's
switching behavior.

The waveforms on an interconnect are quite different depending on whether the
edges are fast or slow. The switching characteristics of the driver can also vary

substantially depending on the TOF.

2.2.2 Source and Parallel Termination

With both ends of the interconnect damping reflections, the signal quality on the
transmission line is excellent. Since there are no reflections on the line, the driver
always sees a constant load of Z,, and the behavior of the interconnect is mostly
independent of the edge rate."

A voltage divider is formed between the driver impedance and the transmission
line's characteristic impedance. With a good source match, the voltage launched
onto the transmission line is just half the source voltage. The driver must continuously supply current to hold this voltage. In other words, the static logic condition
dissipates power, and this is the main tradeoff for parallel termination. As a rule,

2. The predominant exception is for heavy capacitive loading, but parallel termination would not

generally be applied in this case.

[PAGE 88]
74

enhanced signal quality can always be purchased with higher power dissipation. For

example, this signaling approach is taken with ECL, a logic family well known for

Signal Integrity

clean signals and high power dissipation.

SPICE simulations of the topology in Figure 2.4b are shown in Figures 2.5 and
2.6 for both fast and slow rise times. The 50Q lossless transmission line has a delay
of Ins. The source ramps from 0V to 1V through 50Q of source resistance in either

Ins or 4ns for the fast and slow cases, respectively. The capacitive load is 5pF with

a 500 resistor in parallel for the parallel termination case.

Figure 2.5. Signaling with fast edges on source terminated and on source plus

parallel terminated transmission lines; lns rise and fall times with Ins delay: (a)

voltage, (b) power.

0.5

Voltage, V

0.015

0.01

0.005

Power, W
co

S
2

0.005

-0.005

T
Unterminated

Terminated

0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Time, ns

(a)

T

Terminated

5 10 15 20 25 30
Time, ns

(b)

[PAGE 89]
Section 2.2. Ideal Point-to-Point Signaling 75

With both source and parallel termination, the simulations show no difference
between the fast and slow cases except for the edge rates. Power is constantly
expended while holding logic high. Since all resistances equal the characteristic
impedance of the transmission line, the peak voltage on the line is just 0.5V. Signal

quality is excellent.

1.5 T T T T
| Source Terminated __Load

0.5

Voltage, V

| Source and Parallel Terminated

0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Time, ns
(a)
0.015
0.01 [ Source Terminated
0.005
= 0
iI
3)
3
2 Source and Parallel Terminated
0.01 F
0.005 F
0
-0.005
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Time, s

Figure 2.6. Signaling with slow edges on source terminated and on source plus
parallel terminated transmission lines; 4ns rise and fall times with Ins delay: (a)

voltage, (b) power.

[PAGE 90]
76 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

2.2.3. Source Termination Only

Without parallel termination at the load, the +1 reflection coefficient at the load
causes the voltage to essentially double. The large reflected wave travels back to the
driver where it is absorbed by the matched source impedance. Due to the presence
of the reflected waveform, the signal integrity along the transmission line is not
good, but it can be quite good at the load, which is where it matters for a pointto-point net. Once the load capacitance is charged, then the driver no longer needs
to supply current to hold the receiver in the logic high state; therefore, the static
logic condition does not dissipate power.

Unterminated nets are common with both TTL and CMOS to minimize power
dissipation. With good source match, the signal integrity at the load can be quite
good. However, the reflected wave is signficant and can cause difficulties on more
complex topologies (such as multidrop nets). Also, a bidirectional bus using source
termination can be slower because it must wait for the signal to return and terminate
in the source impedance before the bus can be turned around into receive mode.

For the fast edges in Figure 2.5, the voltage at the output of the driver is the same
for both the unterminated and terminated loads for a time span of 2ns (2xTOF).
At that time, the reflection from the unterminated capacitive load arrives at the
driver and terminates. Power dissipation is the same for the two cases for the first
2ns, then it drops off for the unterminated case because the load capacitor becomes
charged and blocks DC current flow.

For the slow edges in Figure 2.6, the reflected wave returns to the driver while
it is still transitioning. The voltage at the source is the sum of the source voltage
and the reflected voltage, so the shape is more complex. The waveform shape at the
load is still a simple ramp. Power dissipation is reduced because the driver does not
have to launch a complete waveform onto the transmission line before the capacitive

load begins charging.

[PAGE 91]
Section 2.3. Nonideal Signaling 77

2.3. Nonideal Signaling

Ideal signaling for CMOS is represented by point-to-point controlled-impedance nets
with matched source impedance. For very high-speed signaling situations, point-topoint nets are required to achieve the required performance. In most cases, point-topoint nets are a luxury that cannot be afforded due to pin counts, board space, power
dissipation, cost, and so on. In these cases, many factors arise that disrupt the signal
quality, and these factors must be controlled to guarantee system performance.
In nonideal situations, the basic signaling requirements that must be met are the
switching incidence, which is strongly related to the receiver threshold, and the

avoidance of false signaling.

2.3.1 Synchronous vs. Asynchronous

Inputs to a device are either asynchronous or synchronous. Asynchronous inputs are
sensitive to voltage at all times, and they are commonly used for clocks, resets, and
interrupts. Synchronous inputs sample voltage only at times specified by a clock,
and they are commonly used for data, address, mode, and configuration signals.
For asynchronous receivers, any time the voltage falls below Vrz or rises above
Vr for a sufficient time, a logic transition will be registered. If noise causes the
voltage level to inadvertently approach valid logic levels, then a system fault can
occur. For synchronous receivers, voltage levels only matter for times around clock
transitions, so synchronous circuits are much more tolerant of poor signal integrity
than are asynchronous circuits. A conservative design approach is to treat all signals

as asynchronous.

2.3.2 Switching Incidence

Driver impedances are often not matched to the characteristic impedance of the
interconnect, and higher driver impedances are often used to save power and silicon
area. Due to voltage division, higher driver impedances launch lower amplitude

voltage waves towards the receiver. If the voltage at the receiver is sufficient when

[PAGE 92]
78 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

the voltage wave arrives, then the receiver switches on the first incidence of the
wave, and signaling is said to be first incidence.

If the first incidence is insufficient, then the voltage must build to a sufficient
level to trigger the receiver. The voltage wave reflects off of the receiver, propagates
back to the source, reflects there, and propagates back to the receiver. If the voltage
is sufficient at this second arrival, then the receiver switches, and the signaling is
said to be second incidence. If the signal is again insufficient, then switching may
occur at the third incidence, fourth incidence, and so on. Anything other than first
incidence switching involves a time penalty of two TOFs per incidence. Note that
a matched source impedance requires first incidence switching because there is no
reflected wave from the source.

Second incidence switching is demonstrated with the SPICE simulation in Figure 2.7. On the first incidence, the voltage at the receiver is just

50
st = Dx 2= L.67V,
Vise = 5555 * 67V,

where the factor of 2 accounts for voltage doubling at the small capacitive load.
A second incidence is required to take the voltage above Vr (2V). First incidence

switching requires either a drop in Vry below 1.67V (plus some noise margin) or a

-
nn

Voltage, V

_ N ad
HBPUuUnunwnune

S
CoM

Time, ns

Figure 2.7. Example SPICE simulation showing second incidence switching.

[PAGE 93]
Section 2.3. Nonideal Signaling 79

Z\
Vo
ot O Zo tg Zo
pea ZiZe Zn -Zo
NZ 4Zo Z5+Z,

Z
Vi=Vo7 47. 0

1+Zo
V,+EV
z 1 1 2°11 >
al 3
wy no}
8 V,+,V + GV,2 =
Z 5
2 2 to)
® 3 Vit hy+Ubvy+hhy s
3 es
z 3
a 4 tm
g 2
5
6 feccec eects cette
Y
_t_
TOF

Reflected Wave Amplitudes

Figure 2.8. Bounce diagram for arbitrary reflection coefficients.

decrease in the driver impedance. For example, a driver impedance of 158.30 would
produce first incidence switching with a noise margin of 0.4V.

Multiple reflections on a lossless transmission line can be visualized with the
help of a bounce diagram, which tracks the amplitude of a reflected wave as it
bounces off of imperfect terminations. A bounce diagram for arbitrary terminations
is shown in Figure 2.8. The pulse from the voltage source is divided across the
source impedance and the transmission line's characteristic impedance to launch a
pulse onto the transmission line. One TOF later, the wave arrives at the far end
termination. The reflected amplitude is given by the reflection coefficient [2 and
the total voltage is the sum of the incident and reflected waves. This total is tallied
to the right. After another TOF, the wave arrives back at the source, where a
reflected wave is generated with amplitude determined by T;. The total voltage is

the incident plus reflected waves plus the voltage that was already there. This total

[PAGE 94]
80 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

250.Q

0- C) 50Q = 2ns SpF ~ open circuit

<I =(250-50)/(250+50)=0.667
L =~+l >

5*50/(250+50)=0.833 0

2 1.666
2.222 4
6 2.778
3.149 8
10 3.520
12 for
Y

Figure 2.9. Bounce diagram for the circuit in Figure 2.7.

is tallied to the left. The process continues at each interface. Running totals down
the sides of the bounce diagram show the voltage amplitudes as a function of time
in increments of the TOF.

As a numerical example, a bounce diagram for the circuit in Figure 2.7 is constructed in Figure 2.9. To simplify the calculations, the load capacitance is assumed
to be vanishingly small so that the reflection coefficient at the load is simply +1.
The amplitudes and timing closely match the SPICE simulation in Figure 2.7.

2.4 Discontinuities

Except for very high-performance systems, high-quality point-to-point nets are

rare, and in practice, signal lines experience real-world discontinuities where the

[PAGE 95]
Section 2.4. Discontinuities 81

impedance changes. As shown in section 2.1.4, any change in impedance alters the
signal while generating a reflected wave. A few of the basic discontinuities are series
inductance, shunt capacitance, capacitive loads, and impedance steps.

Many interconnects introduce series inductance, such as wirebonds, connectors,
and vias, in PCBs and packages. Note that the complete current loop must be considered. For example, a signal wirebond located far from a power or ground wirebond creates a far more inductive loop than one located next to a power or ground
wirebond. For very high-speed edges, when the lumped approximation fails, series
inductive discontinuities can be modeled as high-impedance transmission lines.

Shunt capacitance results whenever a signal line passes near other metal. For
example, a via through a hole in a ground plane results in series inductance for the
via plus shunt capacitance from the via to plane. For very high-speed edges, shunt
capacitive discontinuities can be modeled as low-impedance transmission lines.

Unterminated signaling results in a capacitive load at the far end due to the
loading of the receiver. The capacitive load creates a reflection while affecting timing
due to RC charging times.

Impedance steps occur when the characteristic impedance of the transmission
line changes. For example, a 700 microstrip PCB line connected to a 50Q coaxial
cable introduces a significant impedance step.

These basic discontinuities are examined in detail. A general result is that discontinuities have characteristic time constants that can be used to estimate the

impact of a discontinuity on an interconnect.

2.4.1. Laplace Transform

Analytical time-domain analysis requires the use of the Laplace transform. The

Laplace transform pair is defined as

F(s) = _ f(t)e--* dt
o-

[PAGE 96]
82

Signal Integrity Chapter 2
and

1 a+ joo
f® = x | F(s)e*'ds.

--j00
The Laplace transform pair is denoted symbolically as F'(s) = L[f(t)] and f(t) =
L~'|F(s)]. An important fact from Laplace transform theory is that

L Pa = sF[s|-- f [07].

For interconnect studies, the Laplace transforms of step functions are needed.
For the unit step function

u(t) = 0, t<0O
1, t>0
1
Liu(t)] = S (2.41)

The unit ramp function is defined as

0, t<0
r(t)=4 t/to, O<t<to ,
1, t>t
for which
1 -- e Sto
L(r(t)] = Ls

The unit exponential ramp is

e(t) = (L--e*/"*)u(t),

which is highly convenient because it is expressible without limits and because it

captures the exponential rolloff typically seen in circuits. Its Laplace transform is

Lle(t)] = " _ HE (2.42)

[PAGE 97]
Section 2.4. Discontinuities 83

2.4.2 Capacitive Load

The voltage-current relationship for a capacitor is i = C'du/dt. In terms of traveling

waves, using (2.27) and (2.28) with z = 0, the relationship is
an duvt -- du~
------=c¢c/--_+---_).
Zo Zo ( dt ' dt )
Taking the Laplace transform and collecting terms leads to

-- l-cZos.i4

vo = -- 2.43
1+ cZ,s ( )

For the unit step input, vt(t) = u(t), so substituting (2.41) into (2.43) and

computing the inverse Laplace transform for the circuit initially at rest yields
v =(1-2e°"/)u(t),
where 7 = CZ,. The total voltage is then
v=vt tur =2(1--e7'/)u(t),

which shows the familiar exponential charging of a capacitive load with voltage
doubling for large t/7. Because of the capacitive loading, the waveform at the load
does not rise to one-half its full value (v = 1/2 x 2 = 1) until t = 7 1n2, so the
capacitive load introduces a delay adder of 7 In 2.

For the exponential step, vt (t) = e(t), and repeating the above process yields

For very fast rise times, tj < 7, and
uv & (1--2e7*/)u(t),

which is the same result as for the unit step input. For very slow rise times, ty >> T,

and

vy & (1-- eW*/*)u(t),

[PAGE 98]
84 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

Figure 2.10. Common discontinuities on transmission lines: (a) series inductance,

(b) shunt capacitance.

which is the same as the incident wave, so the capacitive load acts like a perfect
open circuit with a reflection coefficient of +1.

In general, the effect of a discontinuity can be determined by comparing the rise
time to the discontinuity's time constant, 7. If the rise time is short compared to
T, then the behavior is like that for the unit step. On the other hand, if the rise

time is long compared to 7, then the behavior is that for the idealized version of

the discontinuity.

2.4.3 Series Inductance

For a wave incident from the left of the series inductance discontinuity in Fig-

ure 2.10a, the voltage and current are
v= up + uy

and

1, 1

N= 7" ~ 7,
oO oO

U1:
On the right of the inductor, assume that the line is long so there is no reflected
wave, then the voltage and current there are

V2 =vp

[PAGE 99]
Section 2.4. Discontinuities 85

and
1
Q2= Zz
Applying Kirchhoff's voltage law yields
+ - di +
vp +u, = Le +05, (2.44)
while continuity of current requires
1 1 _ 1
mal _ 71 = ae (2.45)
Eliminating vf and substituting i = fous yields
_ duf
= 7 2.46
Vy T dt ' ( )

where T = 4 is the time constant of the discontinuity.

Approximate Solution for Weak Reflections

For small inductances causing weak reflections, the incident wave passes through

+ +
dvy_ _ dvy

i © GP and

almost unchanged, then

d +
vp wre. (2.47)
The reflected wave is a pulse with width approximately equal to the edge rate of
the incident wave. The pulse amplitude is positive for low-to-high transitions and

negative for high-to-low.

Exact Solution for Step Input

Eliminating v; between (2.44) and (2.45) with i= pv} yields
duty
+ + 2
= 2 2.48
Up =U, FTE, (2.48)
Assuming that the circuit is initially at rest, then after Laplace transformation,
l/r

Vo =V,r .
2 I s+1/r

(2.49)

[PAGE 100]
86 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

t/t

Figure 2.11. Exponential functions describe the reflected and transmitted waves

for a step function incident onto series inductance and shunt capacitance.

If up is a unit step, then

1 1

Vit == -
s s+1/r

Inverse Laplace transformation then provides the voltage propagating past the in-

ductor as

and from (2.45), the reflected wave is
vp =e/Tult).

These two functions are plotted in Figure 2.11. The reflected pulse is an exponential spike falling to half its original value by t = 71n2. The transmitted pulse
is smoothed, rising to half its final value by time t = 71ln2. A SPICE simulation
showing step reflection from a series inductor is shown in Figure 2.12.

Considering the frequency domain, at low frequencies the inductor is a short

[PAGE 101]
Section 2.4. Discontinuities 87

Reflection at Source
(short circuit)

Time

Reflection at Load
(open circuit)

----

Distance

502 0.8ns 20nH 50Q 0.8ns

IW. |
~ bf _

= 0.04ns

Figure 2.12. A series inductor reflects an exponential pulse back towards the source

and low-pass filters the wave that continues down the line.

circuit, so these components readily pass through. At high frequencies, the inductor
is an open circuit and reflects these components with a reflection coefficient of +1.
With the high-frequency components reflected back towards the source, the edge
rate of the transmitted pulse is rounded off. At the receiver, the slower edge rate
causes the wave to be detected later than it would be with a faster edge. If the
receiver trip point is 1/2Vpp, then the delay adder due to the inductor is 7 1n2.
In total, the series inductor causes noise by creating a reflected pulse and adds
delay to the signal due to edge rate degradation. For the step input, the reflected
pulse voltage peak equals the amplitude of the step, while the delay adder is 7 ln 2.

[PAGE 102]
88 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

Exact Solution for Exponential Input

Let the incident wave vj be a unit exponential ramp, substitute (2.42) into (2.49),

and inverse Laplace transform to get
en t/t en t/to

~2 2.50
l-to/tr 1-T/to' (2.50)

+
Ug =1

assuming that the circuit is initially at rest.
The delay of the transmitted wave from time t = 0 can be found by setting
vj = 1/2, then
--t/t -t/to
. = iu + Th (2.51)
but a simple solution for ¢ is not possible. The delay adder is the delay of the
transmitted wave minus the delay of the incident wave. For very fast edges with
to <7, the delay is t = 7 1n2, so the delay adder is tg = 71n2--t,ln2 + 71n2, the
same as for the step input. For very slow edges with t, > 7, the delay is t =t, In2
for a delay adder of zero. Just as is seen with the capacitive load, the behavior of
the discontinuity is bounded between the fast edge step response and the slow edge

ideal case (short circuit, for the series inductor).

An approximate solution to (2.51) is
t=7In2+t,In2,

which is asymptotically exact at the extremes of t, and 7, but reaches -17.4%
error near tj, = 7. Using this formula, the delay adder is tg = 71n2, so to a good
approximation, the delay adder for any series inductive discontinuity for any edge
rate is just the delay adder for the step function. The approximate solution can be

fitted to improve the accuracy near tg = 7. One solution with maximum error of

1.45% is
b= (rIn2 + toln2) (1+ 0.194 e-O1Mto/747/to-2))
The reflected pulse is found from (2.45), using (2.50), to be

-_ 1 --t/r tite)
1S TT to/T (© © ,

[PAGE 103]
Section 2.4. Discontinuities 89

Reflected Pulse, v ;

Figure 2.13. Pulses reflected from a series inductive discontinuity for an incident

exponential step depend on the rise time of the step.

Several pulses are plotted in Figure 2.13, where it can be seen that larger discontinuities (increasing 7) and/or faster edges (decreasing t,) lead to sharper pulses
with higher peak amplitudes but with faster decay rates. The peak occurs at time

In&
a

t eak = JI 77,
peak 1/7 --1/t
Trapezoidal Ramp Example

Using a linear ramp for the source excitation, a sample SPICE simulation is shown in
Figure 2.14, where the schematics are shown in inset. For this problem 7 = 0.1ns, so
the Ins rise time appears somewhat slow, and the effect of the discontinuity should
be small. In Figure 2.14a, the source is located sufficiently far from the inductor so
that it has finished switching by the time the pulse returns. The pulse at point 1
is roughly square since the incident edge is triangular. The peak amplitude of the
reflected pulse can be estimated using (2.47) to be

__110x10-9 1

=]
"1 50 1xio ~ OtY:

i)

[PAGE 104]
Signal Integrity Chapter 2

90

fe) 50Q 50Q 10nH 502

50
2v {Hd
ins/! OOF 0.75ns 2ns [50Q
0 = : \ =

: \
: I
0.2 : 1 : \
: 1 ' 1
: \
' \

lene! wa

SC f£ Ss
on

Voltage, V

0
-0.2 i i i i
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Time, ns
(a)
> :
s ; Y
502 50Q 10nH 502
& 50Q ee
> 0.125ns 2ns
0.125ns

'
\
N

16 18 20

8 10 12 «14

Time, ns

(b)

Figure 2.14. Reflected and transmitted waveforms at a series inductance discon-

tinuity: (a) source far from the discontinuity, (b) source near to the discontinuity.

[PAGE 105]
Section 2.4. Discontinuities 91

which closely matches the simulation. The voltage swing is 1V because the 2V
source evenly divides between the source and transmission line impedances. The
pulse width of 1ns is approximately equal to the edge rate. For the transmitted
waveform observed at point 3, there is no significant change in the edge rate, but
rounding of the corners is observable.

In Figure 2.14b, the source is close to the inductor so that the initial edge is still
rising when the reflected pulse returns. The reflected pulse width and amplitude are
similar to the far case in Figure 2.14a, but the reflected pulse voltage superimposes
onto the rising edge and is not as easily observed. In this case, some of the pulse is
"hidden" within the edge itself, where it helps the signal to rise more quickly.

These two cases show how signal integrity is improved when the edge rate lengthens compared to the delays in the circuit. Slower edges produce less noise and allow

the noise to be hidden in the rise/fall times if the interconnects are short enough.

2.4.4 Shunt Capacitance

For a wave incident from the left of the shunt capacitance discontinuity in Fig-

ure 2.10b, the voltage and current are
Vv1t= up + Uy

and

. 1 1 _
b=Zu- Zu:

On the right of the capacitor, assume that the line is long so there is no reflected

wave, then the voltage and current there are

V2 =vp

and

[PAGE 106]
92 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

Applying Kirchhoff's current law yields

1 1 _ dvi 1
Zr Zu = C+ + z" (2.52)

while continuity of the voltage requires

vt +u, =f. (2.53)
Eliminating vj yields
_ dut
= -T-- 2.54
Uy T dt ' ( )

CZ,

5° is the time constant of the discontinuity.

where 7 =

Approximate Solution for Weak Reflections

For small capacitances causing weak reflections, the incident wave passes through

almost unchanged, then diy dot and
ged, dt ~ dt

_ duf
x -T--. 2.
v} TH (2.55)

The reflected wave is a pulse with width approximately equal to the edge rate of

the incident wave. The pulse amplitude is negative for low-to-high transitions and

positive for high-to-low.

Exact Solutions and Duality
Eliminating vy between (2.52) and (2.53) yields

dut
vp = vs 4+7--

dt --
This equation is exactly the same as that for the series inductance in (2.48), so
the shunt capacitor behaves exactly the same as the series inductance but with a
different time constant. Similarly, the reflected wave in (2.54) is the same as that
in (2.46) except for a sign change. The shunt capacitor reflects the same pulse as

the series inductor but with opposite sign and different time constant. The series

[PAGE 107]
Section 2.4. Discontinuities 93

inductance and shunt capacitance are duals, a reasonable result since inductance
encapsulates the effects of the magnetic field while those for the electric field are
captured by capacitance.

Cascades of discontinuities are not covered by the mathematical framework
above, but it is interesting to note that since the pulses reflected from shunt capacitive and series inductive discontinuities are of opposite sign, they cancel when

Tc =Tz, which occurs when Z, = /L/C.

Trapezoidal Ramp Example

A sample SPICE simulation is shown in Figure 2.15, where the edge rate of Ins is
slow compared to the 0.1ns time constant of the shunt capacitor. In Figure 2.15a, the
source is located sufficiently far from the capacitor so that it has finished switching
by the time the pulse returns. The pulse at point 1 is roughly square since the incident edge is triangular. The peak amplitude of the reflected pulse can be estimated

using (2.55) to be

1 1
vp & 54x 10°" 50 ay = -O.1V,

10
which closely matches the simulation. The pulse width is approximately equal to the
edge rate. For the transmitted waveform observed at point 3, there is no significant
change in the edge rate, but rounding of the corners is observable.

In Figure 2.15b, the source is close to the capacitor so that the initial edge is still
rising when the reflected pulse returns. The reflected pulse width and amplitude are
similar to the fast case in Figure 2.15a, but the reflected pulse voltage superimposes
onto the rising edge and is not as easily observed. In this case, some of the pulse is

"hidden" within the edge itself, where it inhibits the rise of the signal.

2.4.5 Impedance Step

The general rule of thumb is to keep all transmission lines at the same characteristic impedance; otherwise, reflections are generated with amplitudes given by
the reflection coefficient in (2.40). For series inductance and shunt capacitance, the

frequency-dependent impedance of these discontinuities causes frequency-dependent

[PAGE 108]
94 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

50Q 502

502 4pF

1
t
! 2V M1
' ins/" 0.75ns 0.75ns ==
H 0 = >
'
'

Voltage, V

1
'
'
\

lad

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 = = 20

Time, ns

(a)

502 50Q 502

Voltage, V

2V H
0.125ns

= 0.125ns

\ :
s 1
y \
; \

Time, ns

(b)

Figure 2.15. Reflected and transmitted waveforms at a shunt capacitance discontinuity. (a) Fast edge produces a reflected pulse with width approximately equal to

the edge rate. (b) Slow edge at the source produces a truncated pulse with modified

rise time.

[PAGE 109]
Section 2.4. Discontinuities 95

reflection coefficients and the generation of narrow spikes with widths similar to the
edge rate. In contrast, the characteristic impedance of transmission lines can be
essentially constant over very broad bandwidths, so the reflection coefficient can be
strongly frequency-independent. In these cases, a fraction of the entire waveform
can be peeled off and reflected back down the line.

Assume a signal propagates down a transmission line with characteristic impedance Z; and meets a discontinuity where the line impedance changes to Z thereafter. When the lines are long or terminated, then (2.40) holds and two cases must
be considered. When Z, > Ze, the reflection coefficient is negative and the reflected wave is a negative copy of the incident wave with reduced amplitude. When
Z, < Zo, the reflected wave is a positive copy. The incident and reflected waves
superimpose.

Voltage is continuous at the discontinuity, so the signal continues onto the second
transmission line with peak amplitude based on the total voltage on the first line.
When the incident and reflected waves have the same sign, they add, and the voltage
signal on the second transmission line is large. Conversely, a negative reflection

coefficient produces a smaller transmitted voltage signal.

Example

Sample SPICE simulations for both cases are shown in Figures 2.16 and 2.17, where
the schematics are shown in inset. See section 2.2.1 for a discussion on fast and slow
edges. In Figure 2.16, the reflection coefficient is +0.1667, so the reflected wave
has the peak amplitude 1V*0.1667=0.1667V. The incident and reflected waves add
up to 1.1667V when they happen to be coincident; otherwise, just the 1V incident
wave or 0.1667V reflected wave is observable. The transmitted wave is launched
with the peak voltage of 1.1667V, so its slew rate increases because it transitions
over a larger voltage in the same time as the incident wave.

In Figure 2.17, the reflection coefficient is -0.1667, so the reflected wave has
the peak amplitude -0.1667V, and the transmitted wave has the peak amplitude

-0.8333V. The slew rate of the transmitted wave decreases.

[PAGE 110]
96 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

50Q 502 502 702
WW]

0.75ns 0.75ns 2ns = 70Q

Voltage, V

Time, ns
(a)
: ® ©
08) : O
: 502 502 70Q
> 06 : av 500°
Sb ing Oran Tas $700
= = . 0.125ns LL
6 «(04 0 : =
> .
0.2
0
-0.2 i | i | i i | i |
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20
Time, ns
(b)

Figure 2.16. Reflected and transmitted waveforms for an impedance discontinuity

to a larger impedance: (a) fast edge, (b) slow edge.

[PAGE 111]
Section 2.4. Discontinuities 97

50Q 50Q 50Q 35.710
Wt _H
0.75ns 0.75ns Ths $ 35.710

. LL

Voltage, V

Time, ns

50Q 302 50Q 35.71

Voltage, V

0.125ns ns 335.710
0.125ns LL

Time, ns

(b)

Figure 2.17. Reflected and transmitted waveforms for an impedance discontinuity

to a smaller impedance: (a) fast edge, (b) slow edge.

[PAGE 112]
98 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

2.5 Crosstalk

Leakage of a signal from one conductor to another is called crosstalk, and it can
be induced through three coupling mechanisms: capacitive, inductive, and radiative. Radiative coupling is essentially a self-induced EMI disturbance and would be
treated within an EMI design framework. This section is concerned with capacitive

and inductive coupling.

2.5.1 Capacitive Crosstalk

All conductors have some capacitance between them, and when sufficiently close, the
capacitance can become large enough to couple significant energy from one line (the
aggressor, or active line) to another (the victim, or passive line). The capacitance
allows displacement current to cross the gap and inject into the victim line. Since
the impedance is equal looking both ways up and down the line, the current splits
equally and sends waves propagating in each direction. The coupling is sketched in
Figure 2.18, where capacitance is distributed along the length of two transmission

lines. The mutual capacitance per-unit-length is c,,.'The problem in general requires

_ . Aggressor Line
Source End ----__--_---- + Load End
Near End I Far End

Victim Line

Figure 2.18. Sketch of capacitive coupling producing crosstalk.

[PAGE 113]
Section 2.5. Crosstalk 99

the simultaneous solution of the coupled differential equations representing the two
lines. Approximations can be applied to show the basic behavior and to derive useful
formulas suitable for weak coupling.

A very short length of the coupled transmission lines is shown in cutout in
Figure 2.18. As the voltage wave passes on the aggressor line, it injects current onto
the victim line through displacement current, then this current splits evenly in each
direction, due to symmetry. Kirchhoff's current law applied to the victim line yields

Mm UF a es
a a

where it is assumed that, due to weak coupling, the voltage across the mutual
capacitor is vs, the amplitude of the voltage wave on the aggressor line. The voltage
is continuous, so vy = vf, and

1 dus
vp =UY= 5 ZotmAa. (2.56)

The aggressor wave creates pulses that have widths about equal to the edge rate and
that propagate in opposite directions on the victim line. A low-to-high transition on
the aggressor line produces positive pulses on the victim line, while a high-to-low
transition produces negative pulses.

Once a crosstalk signal has been launched on the victim line, it too can create crosstalk back onto the aggressor, where it can upset the waveform there and
complicate further computations of crosstalk. When this secondary crosstalk is negligible, then the coupling is said to be weak; otherwise, the coupling is strong. Simple
formulas for crosstalk rely on weak coupling.

The aggressor and forward victim waveforms travel together towards the load
and the far end, respectively. Therefore, at each increment on the lines, the aggressor
edge can add to the victim pulse, and the victim pulse grows in magnitude the
farther down the lines the waves travel. At the far end, for line length d, the total
noise for weak coupling from (2.56) is

1 dvs
UFE = =ZoCmd 2

5 Tr (2.57)

[PAGE 114]
100 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

which matches the capacitive portion of the same result in (10.36), derived using
coupled mode theory. The noise at the far end--far-end noise (FEN)--is a single
pulse with width approximately equal to the edge rate of the signal on the aggressor.

The aggressor and backward victim waveforms travel in opposite directions, so
the overlap where the aggressor can inject current is only one-half the rise time,
At. After this time period, the pulse travels unchanged to the near end. However,
these pulses are generated continuously, so the near end receives them for at least
2x TOF, when the last pulse generated at the far end propagates back to the near
end.

The interaction distance in (2.56) is Ax = v,»zAt, where vy is the phase velocity.
To simplify the result, assume that the aggressor edge is triangular, then dv, /dt =
Uo/At, where vo is the peak voltage. Substituting these into (2.56) yields the near-

end noise (NEN) for weak coupling as
UNE = 7 ZoemUpvo-

However, Zovp = ./€/c/ Véc = 1/c, where c is the capacitance per-unit-length of

either line, so

1 Gm
UNE = =~--UVo-
4e¢

Expressing as a coupling coefficient yields

Kng=7--, (2.58)
4c

where Kye = UnE/Vo. This result matches the capacitive portion of the same result
in (10.31), derived using coupled mode theory.

In summary, capacitive crosstalk results in a short pulse at the far end and a
long signal at the near end. The far-end signal grows in amplitude with longer lines,
while near-end noise grows in width with longer lines. The crosstalk noise is positive
for low-to-high transitions and negative for high-to-low. The results are summarized

in Figure 2.19.

[PAGE 115]
Section 2.5. Crosstalk 101

T

7] lt

-2Tor=, NEN FEN =| let

Figure 2.19. Summary of noise waveforms for weak capacitive coupling.

2.5.2 Inductive Crosstalk

The closed loops formed by two signal lines are coupled by mutual inductance, which
causes a crosstalk voltage to be generated on the victim line due to changes in the
current on the aggressor line according to v = m4, In contrast to the capacitive
case, where current is injected into the victim line, the net change in current is
zero; the aggressor line can only drive current along the victim line. As a result, the
forward and backward crosstalk have opposite polarities. The coupling is sketched
in Figure 2.20, where mutual inductance, m, is distributed along the length of the

line. Similar to the case for capacitive crosstalk, the problem in general requires

Sf . Aggressor Line

Source End 2 20-21 eV eM. o/VV\ Load End

) ) ) )

Near End 2 2W\--_2/VWV\--__2/VV\_ VV" Far End

. Victim Line

is
Sf is of ef

)»

Vp = /2fWW_ : --~ ve

< Ax =>

Figure 2.20. Sketch of inductive coupling producing crosstalk.

[PAGE 116]
102 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

the simultaneous solution of the coupled differential equation representing the two
lines. Approximations can be applied to show the basic behavior and to derive useful
formulas suitable for weak coupling.

A very short length of the coupled transmission lines is shown in cutout in
Figure 2.20. As the current wave passes on the aggressor line, it induces a series
voltage on the victim line through the mutual inductance. Kirchhoff's voltage law

applied to the victim line yields
di
Vp = mAr--- + uf.

The currents are continuous, so v,/Z, = --v¢/Z,. Eliminating vy and substituting

is =vUs/Z_ yields the backward wave amplitude as

im dvs
O27 dt.

and similarly for the forward wave
1m dvs

up= "3Z, oT
The aggressor wave creates pulses that have widths about equal to the edge rate and
that propagate in opposite directions on the victim line. A low-to-high transition
on the aggressor line produces a positive backward pulse and a negative forward
pulse on the victim line, while a high-to-low transition reverses the signs.

At this point, the inductive crosstalk derivation follows that of capacitive crosstalk. The forward noise travels with the aggressor wave and picks up amplitude
continuously. The backward noise only picks up noise for half the edge rate since it
and the aggressor travel in opposite directions. The results for inductive crosstalk

are

1m dvs
97,0 a

UFE = (2.59)

and, assuming a triangular edge on the aggressor waveform,

1m
UNE = =--UVo-

42

[PAGE 117]
Section 2.5. Crosstalk 103

7 ft
r

L-ror-| NEN ren

Figure 2.21. Summary of noise waveforms for weak inductive coupling.

Expressing the near-end noise as a coupling coefficient yields

Kyre= us (2.60)

Note that these results match (10.36) and (10.31), derived using coupled mode
theory.

In summary, inductive crosstalk is very similar to the capacitive crosstalk: a

short pulse at the far end and a long signal at the near end. The difference is in the

signs, where forward inductive and capacitive crosstalk have opposite signs. The

results are summarized in Figure 2.21.

2.5.3 Total Crosstalk

In the general case, capacitive and inductive crosstalk are simultaneously present.
Summing (2.57) and (2.59) yields
1 m \ dus
=-d|Z -=>)]-- 2.61
UFE 2 ( ofm >) dt ' ( )
which applies for weak coupling. An implicit assumption is that the phase velocities
on the two coupled lines are equal. Because of the opposite polarities for capacitive

and inductive crosstalk, far-end noise enjoys some cancellation. Far-end noise is

m

eliminated when Zc, -- z =D, or

[PAGE 118]
104 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

a balanced condition where both coupling terms represent the same fraction of the
aggressor line's per-unit-length parameters.

For near-end noise, summing the capacitive crosstalk from (2.58) and the inductive crosstalk from (2.60) yields

Kyp = ; (= + ) (2.62)

Cancellation is not possible, so near-end crosstalk always exists.

Note that the cancellation of far-end crosstalk enables the creation of directional
couplers. With far-end cancellation, a sample of a signal moving left-to-right only
appears at the left port. Similarly, a signal moving right-to-left produces a signal
only at the right port. Such a directional coupler can be used to create network
analyzers, which operate on the principal of directional traveling waves. From the
theory, good performance requires equal phase velocities on two lines, plus careful
balance of capacitive and inductive crosstalk.

In digital systems, many closely spaced lines exist with a mix of crosstalk components. For capacitive crosstalk, lines shield each other so c,, decreases rapidly for
victim lines farther from the aggressor. Therefore, capacitive crosstalk is typically
strong to a line's neighbors but weak to other lines. For inductive crosstalk, magnetic fields are not shielded by normal metals, so m decreases slowly and inductive
crosstalk is strong for many of a line's neighbors. Summing these two results, the
typical crosstalk behavior is that coupling to neighbors is both inductive and capacitive, with capacitive crosstalk often dominating, while coupling to farther lines

is mostly inductive.

2.6 Topology

A point-to-point connection between two components yields the highest signal integrity, but most circuits require several components to be connected with a single
net. A net connecting three or more pins is a multidrop net. For low-speed op-

eration, just about any topology that completes the connection is acceptable. To

[PAGE 119]
Section 2.6. Topology 105

achieve high-speed operation, the layout of the net becomes important. Several
topologies for interconnecting components are sketched in Figure 2.22.

The daisy chain simply stitches from one circuit to the next and is suitable for
low-speed nets. With no termination (other than any driver source impedance),
each drop introduces a shunt capacitance to ground, and the stubs between drops
support complex multiple reflections. Daisy chains work well when the delay of the
entire length of the net is short compared to the rise time; then the net acts as a
capacitive load and the driver can be scaled accordingly.

The near-end cluster or star cluster can be very effective but requires delicate
balance to achieve good performance for fast edges. Consider the example in Figure 2.23, where a single stub is connected in the middle of a 10ns line for a short
rise-time pulse. As the stub length increases, the ringing period increases and the
ringing amplitude takes longer to settle. The voltage dividers, due to the source
impedance and the impedance step at the stub, can be seen within the first 12ns on
the near-end plot. When the stub reaches the same length as the main line length
beyond the branch, the waveform quality improves dramatically, although multiple
reflections are still required to reach the full line value. Star clusters require equal
stub length and loading.

Just as for the daisy chain, if the edge rate is sufficiently long, then the line
lengths in the star cluster are not important. In Figure 2.24, the star cluster of
Figure 2.23 is resimulated with a slow 30ns edge, which is long enough for the
source edge to propagate to the far-end load and back plus 10ns, which is one
round trip TOF on the 5ns far-end section. The deviations from the perfect ramp
are primarily isolated to the edge's ramp time with almost no ringing later.

In general, stubs create two principal opportunities for loss of signal quality.
First, the branch in the line creates an impedance discontinuity by placing the two
lines in parallel. The impedance discontinuity will appear as a simple voltage divider
for the shortest round trip TOF to the closest discontinuity. Second, reflections from

the unmatched terminations will return to the branching point and reflect again,

[PAGE 120]
106

= L, =|

(a) Point-to-point

(d) Far-end cluster

(b) Daisy chain (c) Near-end (or star) cluster

-- | +4 o7le

(e) Periodic loading

Figure 2.22. A few topologies for connecting components.

[PAGE 121]
107

50Q 50Q S5ns 50Q Sns

1V

Vsource 502 T 6 pF Vearend

Ins > variable delay

T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T T

5 [Sst | | 5 ns stub |
5 ns stub
4 f |

| 4 ns stub 4ns stub | 4 ns stub

2

ii 2 ns stub if 2 ns stub Bast
1 ns stub eee) pT st

o |! :

A 'OSPR yOA,

L L 1 1 1 L L 1 1 1 L L 1 1 L L L 1 1 1 L

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 += £70 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 += £470 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
Time, ns Time, ns Time, ns

(a) Voltage at source (b) Voltage at stub (c) Voltage at far end load

Figure 2.23. Example SPICE simulations of the effects of stubs with a fast Ins edge. Note the 1V offsets added to

separate the waveforms.

[PAGE 122]
108

5 ns stub

5 ns stub

4 ns stub

4 ns stub

3 ns stub

3 ns stub

A {88][0A,

2 ns stub

2 ns stub

1 ns stub

1 ns stub

5 ns stub

4 ns stub

3 ns stub

2 ns stub

1 ns stub

40
Time, ns

40
Time, ns

10 20 30 50 60 70 0 10 20 30 50 60

(a) Voltage at source. (b) Voltage at stub.

Figure 2.24. Example SPICE simulations

separate the waveforms.

70 0

1

0

20

40
Time, ns

30 50.60

(c) Voltage at far end.

70 80

of the effects of stubs with a slow 30ns edge. Note the 1V offsets added to

[PAGE 123]
Section 2.6. Topology 109

causing multiple reflections. The sum of all of these interactions can be quite complex and will in general require detailed simulation.

The far-end cluster improves signal integrity by limiting the length of the far-end
stubs. By keeping the lengths of stubs short compared to the edge rate, the far-end
cluster behaves like a single capacitive load.

Finally, good signal integrity can be achieved by periodically loading a transmission line with additional capacitance. A straight transmission line can be tapped
along its length, as shown in Figure 2.22e, to create a multidrop net well suited to
creating an expansion bus. Assuming that the stubs and the distance between them
are short compared to the signal rise time, then the composite structure acts as an
artificial transmission line with characteristic impedance lower than the unloaded
trunk transmission line. The inductance is unaffected, but the capacitive loading
from the stubs and associated receivers adds to the capacitance of the trunk to
pull down the characteristic impedance. If the total capacitive load is C, then the
distributed loading is C,/d, where d is the length of the trunk line. The loaded

characteristic impedance and phase velocity are then

£ Z Z,
ZL =

~VerCr/d Vier fled) 1+ CL /C"
and

1 Up Up

~ e+ CL/d) V1+Cz/(ed) 1+ CO, /C'

where C' = cd is the total capacitance of the trunk line, and Z, and vp are the
unloaded values for the trunk line. Note how the loading capacitance only lowers
impedance and phase velocity. To avoid reflections from an impedance step, the
loaded impedance must be matched to other system impedances. High-performance
expansion bus specifications include limits on stub lengths and capacitive loading

per slot to ensure impedance match and signal integrity.

[PAGE 124]
110 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

Wiring Rules

In a large system, detailed simulation of every net is too time consuming. Precharacterization of several topologies can provide a library of acceptable layouts, called
wiring rules, that are guaranteed to produce acceptable signal quality and delay. A
system designed using such a library is then correct by construction. Any generic
topology, such as one from Figure 2.22, can be considered for characterization for
wiring rules.

Detailed simulations over process corners with each variable combination are
required, so the effort to construct a usable set of wiring rules can be considerable.
Metrics from the simulation may include delay, rise and fall time, overshoot, undershoot, crosstalk, settling time, and SSN. After appropriate metrics and their bounds
have been selected, a large number of simulations can be performed to find the range
of driver strengths and loadings, characteristic impedances, and line lengths that
fit within the bounds. The set of valid values are fitted to equations, and these
equations become the wiring rules.

To demonstrate, the simple circuit shown in inset in Figure 2.25 has fixed driver
impedance and rise time, load capacitance, and transmission line delay. What range
of characteristic impedance is allowable so that the voltage at the load rises to 0.75V
within 3ns? Running several cases, it can be seen that impedances above 40Q are
allowed. If a limit for overshoot is also specified, then an upper limit on characteristic

impedance can be established.

2.7 Simultaneous Switching Noise

Ideally, every signal would be provided with separate and isolated power and ground
connections. For packaged digital components, such dedicated pins drive up packaging costs by increasing pin counts. Common practice is to share several ground
and power pins among all of the signal pins, and the performance of the system is
strongly related to the ratio of the number of signal pins to the number of ground

and/or power pins. For example, an 8:1 signal-to-ground ratio is common, where the

[PAGE 125]
Section 2.8. System Timing 111

number of power pins equals the number of ground pins. Very high-speed interfaces
require ratios as small as 2:1, while very low-performance interfaces may need only
one power pin and one ground pin.

Shared ground and power pins enable coupling from one signal line to another.
Because the power distribution inductance is small, the coupled noise is small if few
drivers are switching at any given time. However, the level of coupled noise increases
with the number of switching outputs, and when the whole bus is switching, the
noise level can become excessive. For this reason, this noise mechanism is called
simultaneous switching noise (SSN). It is also known as delta-I noise since it results
from the rate-of-change of current across the package inductance. SSN is treated in

detail in chapter 3.

2.8 System Timing

Prior sections have discussed in detail many mechanisms that cause degradation in

digital signaling. If signal integrity is sufficiently reduced, then the performance of

Load Voltage, V oy, V

Figure 2.25. Example simulations to generate a wiring rule for allowed transmis-

sion line impedance given delay, driver impedance, and load.

[PAGE 126]
112 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

the digital system will suffer. The maximum clock rate of a digital system is related
to the signaling specifications, driver and receiver performance, and interconnect
length. Eye diagrams offer a convenient method to verify that signaling specifications

are met while providing estimates of skew.

2.8.1 Maximum Clock Rate

The maximum clock rate of a synchronous system is of primary interest, and the
waveforms in Figure 2.26 show the major components that set the upper limit on the
clock rate: driver propagation delay (t,), TOF on the interconnect, and the setup
and hold times at the receiver. Note that the driver's rise/fall time is subsumed
into the driver's propagation delay; a longer rise time causes the driver's output to
reach the receiver's trigger point later, so delay is increased.

Assuming that the data transitions and is sampled on the rising clock edge, then

before the rising clock edge, it must be true that
P> tp + TOF + tg.

Since the clock rate is inversely proportional to frequency, the maximum clock rate

is
fmax < ! (2.63)
me" ty + TOF + ts!
After the rising clock edge, it must be true that
ty <tp + TOF. (2.64)

So the maximum clock rate is given by (2.63) under the condition that (2.64) is
true.

Normally, short driver delay is desired to help maximize the system clock frequency. However, for very short and fast interconnects, the TOF is very small and

longer t, may be needed to satisfy the receiver hold time.

[PAGE 127]
113

CLK

DATA at DRIVER

DATA at RECEIVER

Figure 2.26. Timing diagram for determining maximum clock rate.

[PAGE 128]
114 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

2.8.2 Eye Diagrams

Signaling specifications must be met for every signal at every clock cycle. For a long
stream of bits, it can be difficult to tell if the signal meets the specifications. To
facilitate analyses, the bits can be superimposed to create a single plot from which
all of the signaling specifications can be checked.

Consider the clocked data presented in Figure 2.27, where it is assumed that
the data is sampled on the rising edge of the clock. The data associated with each
rising edge can be cut out and plotted together, as shown for a few of the edges.
A good plot results when the waveform is plotted for one clock period before and
after the edge, then the full data bit, plus half the one before and half one after,
are captured. Superimposing all of the bits then builds an eye diagram. For multiconductor interconnects, the eye diagrams for each line can be superimposed to
examine the signal specifications for the whole interconnect.

As an example, consider the schematic in Figure 2.28, where the driver and

Cycle 123 45 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

~ Un

LOGIC 0110010 10 11 «1 0 ~0 0

Bits at Cycles \V

7 and 11 | I I ae
Bits at Cycles j

8 and 14 I I | | Eye Diagram

Figure 2.27. Eye diagrams are constructed by overlapping the individual bits in a

bit stream.

[PAGE 129]
Section 2.8. System Timing 115

of/VV\

_/\_ SOpF
a ofVV\
Nw
a
_/\_ SOpF
+
--O ofVV\ y C) 33V
. J
SOpF
é$ O ofVV\ é
L___@
oe ol/VV\ } $
p 3 ~
3 2
Es n S
ome) mS is} n
mo a 5 4

Figure 2.28. Schematic for demonstration of eye diagrams from SPICE simula-

tions.

interconnect models are those appearing in the netlist in Appendix C. Each driver
is driven by a random bit stream to simulate a digital signaling sequence. SSN
and crosstalk introduced by the package degrade the signal quality at the receiver,
modeled here by simple capacitance. In Figure 2.29, the data is driven at a 125MHz
clock rate, and the resulting eye diagram for all three signal lines taken together
is very clean. As the clock rate is increased to 250MHz in Figure 2.30, the eye
diagram begins to show significant impact due to finite edge rate and skew. By
500MHz, shown in Figure 2.31, the eye diagram begins closing down. Note how as
the clock frequency rises, the waveforms do not trace each other as well.

One bit of data is often called a symbol. In a single stream of data, if the

waveform of one bit is not completely settled by the time of the clock transition

[PAGE 130]
116 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

Voltage, v

Voltage, v

: 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16

Time, ns

Figure 2.29. Clock and output waveforms (with 5V offsets) and eye diagram of

the outputs for the circuit in Figure 2.28 at 125MHz.

[PAGE 131]
Section 2.8. System Timing 117

Voltage, v

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200

Time, ns

4 T T T T

Voltage, v

Figure 2.30. Clock and output waveforms (with 5V offsets) and eye diagram of

the outputs for the circuit in Figure 2.28 at 250MHz.

[PAGE 132]
118 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

Voltage, v

"9 20 40 60 80 100

Voltage, v

Time, ns

Figure 2.31. Clock and output waveforms (with 5V offsets) and eye diagram of

the outputs for the circuit in Figure 2.28 at 500MHz.

[PAGE 133]
Section 2.8. System Timing 119

CLK EDGE

TH

Skew --> 7

IL

Figure 2.32. Eye diagrams help determine if signals satisfy signaling specifications.

for the next bit, it will affect the shape of the following bit, leading to lower eye
quality. The effect is readily apparent in Figure 2.31. When one symbol affects the
next, intersymbol interference (ISI) is said to occur.

Signal quality only really matters at receivers, where the signal is interpreted
according to the logic specifications. Consider the representative eye diagram shown
in Figure 2.32. The input specification is superimposed onto the eye diagram. Assuming that the signal is sampled at the clock edge, then the receiver specifications

will be satisfied when t; > tg and t2 > ty, the setup and hold times, respectively.

2.8.3 Skew, Jitter, and Margin

The timing diagram in Figure 2.26 implies that the clock and data edges fall at
precise times. As can be seen in the eye diagrams in Figures 2.29 through 2.31,
data edges fall along a range of times due to the influences of SSN, crosstalk, TOF
variations, and other effects. The uncertainty in the arrival time of a signal edge is
the signal skew, and all sources of skew must be taken into account to ensure reliable

operation of the system. Clock skew refers specifically to skew from all sources on

[PAGE 134]
120 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

the clock line in a synchronous system.

Clock generators inherently produce some variation in the timing of clock edges
at their outputs, and this variation is called clock jitter. In a system driven by a
single clock generator, all components see the same variation in the timing of the
clock edges, so the timing budget is not directly affected by clock jitter. However,
jitter does effectively reduce the available clock cycle by occasionally producing one
clock edge late and the next one early, and the lower effective clock cycle does affect
the timing budget. So clock jitter is included in the timing budget, not because of
the uncertainty in the clock edge, but because of the uncertainty in the clock period.

Skews and jitter can be incorporated into the system clock estimates in (2.63)
and (2.64), with the precise representation depending on how the skew is broken
down. Assuming that the driver propagation delay and the receiver setup and hold
times are all worst-case from the manufacturer's data sheet, then with TOF skew,
clock skew, clock jitter, and margin, the maximum clock rate is given by

1

i
Fmaz ty + TOF + ts + Atror + Atctock + At jitter + Atmargin

assuming that
ty < ty + TOF + Atror + Atctock + At jitter + Atmargin

holds true.

If eye diagrams are not available, skew can be estimated from peak noise and
the signal slew rate. In-phase noise pushes a waveform higher, so the rising edge
arrives at the load earlier. Similarly, out-of-phase noise pushes a waveform lower for
later arrival of rising edges. Therefore, additive noise directly causes skew in the
timing of the rising and falling edges. The effect of delay caused by noise is often
referred to as pushout. Assuming that the edges are approximately linear, the slew
rate is Av/At. The skew is then approximately the noise voltage times the inverse
of the slew rate:

At
= Unoise ZX: 2.
Atror U Av ( 65)

[PAGE 135]
Section 2.8. System Timing 121

For example, in Figure 2.31, the peak-to-peak noise at the center of the eye is
approximately 1V, while the slew rate is 3.3V/2ns. Applying these numbers to
(2.65) yields about 0.6ns of skew compared to about 0.7ns from the eye diagram.

Note from (2.65) that a steeper waveform edge induces less skew for a given
amount of noise. On the other hand, sharp edges induce noise through additional
crosstalk and SSN. Therefore, there is a tradeoff between noise and timing skew.
Because digital signaling operates with noise margins, there is no benefit to reducing
noise below a certain level. Since lowering the noise through reduced edge rate pays
a penalty in timing, an optimal system will utilize the fastest edge rates consistent
with an acceptable noise level.

Skew estimates from peak noise voltage can also be used to help set noise budgets. Assuming worst-case additive skew, then the allowed skew from the timing
budget can be allocated to noise sources such as crosstalk and SSN to help resolve
design options like routing density and package style. Because detailed eye diagram
simulations are time-consuming to set up and run, they may be more appropriate

in later design confirmation stages.

2.8.4 Dual Data Rate

In some systems, data is sampled on both the rising and falling edges of the clock,
and these systems are said to be dual data rate (DDR). One of the main advantages
of DDR is that the bandwidth of the clock is halved for a given data rate, so DDR
is an excellent choice for high-speed interconnects. However, to latch the data with
a rising edge, the clock must be delayed by 90° with a delay-locked loop (DLL) or
doubled in frequency with a phase-locked loop (PLL), so extra circuitry is required
at the receive end. Timing considerations are unchanged for DDR except for the

halving of the period plus the addition of jitter for the DLL or PLL.

[PAGE 136]
122

Signal Integrity Chapter 2
2.9 Exercises

1. Show that
vt vt Zot
2
and
v-- Zot
Vv =
2

on a lossless transmission line.

2. Show that the inductance per-unit-length of the parallel-plate transmission
line in Figure 2.33 is

Figure 2.33. Cross section of a parallel plate transmission line.

H
C= Io
boty

when W > H. Show that the characteristic impedance is

Mo H

Er€o W

Zo =

3. (a) Using the notation in Figure 2.34, show that the input impedance of a

loaded lossy transmission line is

Zr + Zo tanh(yd)
Ln = Zo >----------.. 2.66
Zo + Zr tanh(yd) (2.66)

[PAGE 137]
Section 2.9. Exercises 123

Figure 2.34. Notation for a loaded transmission line.

(b) Show that the input impedance of a loaded lossless transmission line is

Zi +9Z> tan(Gd)
Lin = Zo}: 2.
Zo +941 tan((d) (2.67)

4. (a) Describe the signal integrity effect of a series capacitor in terms of

frequency-dependent impedance and reflection coefficients.

(b) Set up and run a SPICE simulation to demonstrate the effects of a series
10pF capacitor on the reflected and transmitted signal. Use a 50 system,
Ins rise and fall times, 7ns wide pulse, and choose the transmission line

lengths to be long compared to the edge rate.

5. Assume that a capacitor is inserted in series into a long transmission line.
Set up and solve for the exact reflected, transmitted, and total voltages for
an incident unit step, assuming the circuit is initially at rest. Find an approximate solution for small capacitance. Show that the time constant for the

discontinuity is T= 2C'Z.

6. Repeat problem 4 for a shunt inductance of 25nH. Is this an effective way to

block the transmitted signal?

7. Assume that a long transmission line is shorted to ground in the middle with
a shunt inductor. Set up and solve for the exact reflected, transmitted, and

total voltages for an incident unit step, assuming the circuit is initially at

[PAGE 138]
124

10.

11.

12.

13.

Signal Integrity Chapter 2

rest. Find an approximate solution for small inductance. Show that the time

constant for the discontinuity is T = 2L/Zp.

Describe the signal integrity at the load for the circuit in Figure 2.4b as the
driver impedance Z, varies from 12 to 2500Q. Assume a receiver with 6pF of
capacitive loading, a 500 transmission line with 10ns of delay, and a driver

pulse of Ins rise and fall, 7ns width, and 1V peak.
How are forward and backward crosstalk affected when

(a) The characteristic impedances of the two transmission lines are different,

but the phase velocities are the same?

(b) The characteristic impedances of the two transmission lines are equal,

but the phase velocities are different?

(a) Find the largest driver impedance that supports first incidence switching

on a long 70Q transmission line with a small capacitive load.
(b) Repeat for second incidence switching.

Use a 5V source swing and TTL logic high (2V) receiver threshold with no

margin.

Discuss the impact of using a driver impedance lower than necessary for first
incidence switching on timing, SSN, crosstalk, and power dissipation. (A single

SPICE example may be used for the discussion.)

Sketch 35ns of the waveform at points 1 and 2 for the schematic in Figure 2.7,
modified as follows: source voltage rises from 0 to 3V in 2ns, source impedance
is 150Q, transmission line impedance is 752 with 10ns of delay, and the load

capacitance is small.

In source synchronous systems, the clock is edge-aligned and routed with the
data to clock the data into the receivers. This system eliminates clock skew,

driver delay, and TOF from the timing budget, enabling higher clock rates.

[PAGE 139]
Section 2.9. Exercises 125

Derive the setup and hold time requirements for a DDR source synchronous

system.

14. Show that far-end skew caused by crosstalk is approximately independent of

edge rate. Assume weak coupling and trapezoidal edges.

15. (a) Show that the input impedance of a lossless transmission line shorted at

the far end is given by
Zin = 9Zo tan(Gd).

Draw a sketch of Zi, for Gd ranging from 0 to 37 and label the frequency
bands where the transmission line looks inductive and where it looks
capacitive. At what frequencies does this shorted transmission line look

like an open circuit?

(b) Show that the input impedance of a lossless transmission line open-

circuited at the far end is given by
Zin = --JZo cot( 3d).

Draw a sketch of Zi, for Gd ranging from 0 to 37 and label the frequency
bands where the transmission line looks inductive and where it looks
capacitive. At what frequencies does this opened transmission line look

like a short circuit?

(c) Repeat for a transmission line terminated in a resistance equal to the

characteristic impedance of the line.

16. Find the transmission line equations by applying Kirchhoff's voltage and current laws to the differential transmission line section in Figure 2.35. How does

the result compare to (2.3) and (2.4)?

17. Let 7 = z+ vt and find the direction of travel, velocity, and characteristic

impedance of a lossless transmission line for an arbitrary waveform.

[PAGE 140]
126 Signal Integrity Chapter 2

i(z,t) R Liz +Az,t)
+> =-- +
v(z,t) C >= G v(z +Az,t)
| a
Z Z+AZ

Figure 2.35. Lumped model of a short length of a transmission line. Note the

reversal in component order from Figure 2.1.

18. Assume that a voltage source is connected in series at the junction between
two lossy transmission lines. Find the reflection and transmission coefficients

for the junction. What is the condition for matched impedance (T' = 0)?

19. A 1V 50Q driver with a Ins edge rate drives a transmission line with ¢ =
289nH/m, c = 115pF/m, and r = 200/m loaded at the far end by 5pF. For
the lossy and lossless cases, plot the waveforms at the source and load for a
low-to-high transition for line lengths of 10cm, 30cm, 90cm, and 270cm. When

is the lossless assumption valid?

20. Determine a wiring rule for the variable length line in Figure 2.23 such that

the ringing is limited to +20% overshoot and undershoot.

21. For the star and daisy chain topologies in Figure 2.36,use SPICE simulations
to determine which is better in terms of delay, skew, overshoot /undershoot,
and power dissipation. Use multicycle simulation and eye diagrams, if avail-

able.

[PAGE 141]
127

10 Q

50 Q
0.5ns

50Q
0.2ns

T sor 10Q
TL Pp

50Q =
0.5ns B L SpF

50Q
0.Ins SpF

(a)

50 Q
0.3ns

A

i SpF

50Q

0.1ns 502

0.2ns
50 Q

0.1ns SpF

HH

50 Q
0.3ns

C = spr

(b)

Figure 2.36. Two routing schemes to connect three loads to a single driver: (a) star, (b) daisy chain.

[PAGE 143]
Chapter 3

SIMULTANEOUS
SWITCHING NOISE

Simultaneous switching noise (SSN) refers to noise generated in a digital system due
to rapid changes in voltage and current caused by many circuits switching at the
same time. It can be a severe problem for fast and/or wide buses on packaged devices, where the fast-changing currents produce large voltages on the package power
and ground pins. For this reason, SSN is also referred to as 580, for simultaneously
switching outputs.

SSN is not a random noise process, such as thermal noise or one-shot noise, so
SSN is deterministic and can be modeled and simulated. A major goal of detailed
system simulation is to characterize SSN to look for violations of noise margins and
for effects on timing.

SSN is generated in circuits through many mechanisms, where each has a different mitigating strategy. On-chip and on-module SSN , generated by signaling between drivers and receivers located on the same package, can be minimized through
interconnect parasitic reduction and /or incorporation of bypass capacitors. Off-chip
and off-module SSN, generated by signaling between drivers and receivers in separate packages, generally requires parasitic reduction, although bypass capacitors
have some effect. SSN induced from crosstalk can be minimized by increased line

spacing or by multilayered substrates using planes to isolate routing layers.

129

[PAGE 144]
Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

130

SSN is principally due to package and socket inductance in the power distribution
system. High-performance parts are almost always mounted on PCBs with solid
power and ground planes, so power distribution up to the part is excellent. The
weak link is then the connection between the die and the planes: the package and
any sockets. The power and ground inductances in packages and sockets can usually
be treated as lumped elements, and this chapter makes that assumption.

The huge variety of available logic styles and termination schemes makes impossible an exhaustive coverage of all combinations. For the following discussion,
CMOS rail-to-rail unterminated signaling is assumed where all power supply parasitics are assumed to result from a package and/or socket. Logic signaling involves
the charging and discharging of capacitances by the signal line. As shown in Figure 3.1, logic 0 or 1 is signaled with the appropriate charging and discharging of
two capacitors by using the signal line to force the voltage at their junction. Driving
the signal line to zero charges the upper capacitance while discharging the lower,
as in Figure 3.la. Conversely, driving the signal line to +V discharges the upper
capacitance while charging the lower, as in Figure 3.1b, The paths taken by these
charging and discharging currents create unwanted voltages on power distribution

inductances according to Le,

Power Power

+V

Charged
jo)
Discharge

Signal Signal

Oo

scharged

+V

Charged

;

Ground Ground
(a) (b)

Figure 3.1. CMOS rail-to-rail unterminated signaling: (a) logic 0, (b) logic 1,

[PAGE 145]
Section 3.1. Origins of SSN 131

+

 .

+t |

On-Chip ---- Package ---> System =

Driver 2

Figure 3.2, Canonical schematic for investigating SSN.

3.1 Origins of SSN

The origins of SSN can be investigated with the help of the simple schematic in
Figure 3.2, which includes all of the components involved with SSN. The schematic
shows a system consisting of a digital chip with two off-chip drivers (Drivers 1
and 2) and one on-chip driver (Driver 3) that connect to the system through a
package. The package model consists of partial self-inductances, which are shown,
and partial mutual inductances, which are not. The system loads for the off-chip
drivers are represented by capacitances.

There are two major cases to consider: on-chip switching and off-chip switching.
For on-chip switching, Driver 3 signals to Driver 1. For off-chip switching, Drivers 1
and 2 signal to the system receivers represented by capacitive loads. The effects of

the package inductance are different for each case.

3.1.1 On-Chip Switching

For on-chip switching, Driver 3 must charge and discharge the input capacitances of

Driver 1. For the high-to-low transition, the current paths are shown in Figure 3.3.

[PAGE 146]
132 Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

Lp Charging L,

va ie
ate

On-Chip aan Package [---> System =

Figure 3.3. Current paths for signaling a change from logic 1 to logic 0 between

an on-chip driver and an on-chip receiver.

For discharging the lower capacitance, the currents are wholly contained on-chip and
generate no interconnect noise. For charging the upper capacitance, the currents flow
through the package and supply inductances and induce voltages according to Le
For the low-to-high transition, the upper capacitance is discharged while the lower
capacitance is charged, and from the interconnect and supply point of view, the
current paths are identical.

The current flows through both the package power and ground partial inductances, but not through the signal partial inductances. Since the current flow through
L, and L, is in opposite directions, the partial mutual inductance reduces the inductance in the loop. The inductance in this case is L = Ly + Lg -- 2Mpg, where
Mpg is the partial mutual inductance between Ly and Lg.

Due to voltages induced on the package and supply inductances, the on-chip
voltage is reduced from vs. The on-chip voltage is given by Uchip = Us --~ La
L,® qj; The drop in on-chip voltage is called supply droop, rail collapse, or supply

compresston. While the on-chip voltage initially drops in value, at later times it will

[PAGE 147]
Section 3.1. Origins of SSN

133

typically ring around v, with a damped profile. The reduction in supply levels slows

on-chip circuits and reduces the maximum clock speed.

Several strategies are apparent for minimizing rail collapse. The basic strategy

is to reduce the induced noise by decreasing either inductance or the rate of change

in the current. The options are:

1.

Slow down the on-chip drivers to reduce di/dt. This option is not practical

when maximum clock rate is required.

- Reduce the power supply inductance. High-speed design generally requires

closely spaced power and ground planes to obtain the least inductance from

the power supply to the circuits.

. Reduce the package partial self-inductances for the power and ground paths.

Lower inductance can be achieved by adding power and ground pins and by
shortening the length of the power and ground path. Power and ground planes

may also reduce the partial self-inductances.

. Increase the package partial mutual inductance between the power and ground

partial self-inductances. Power pins should be located as close to ground pins
as possible. Power and ground pins are ideally manipulated in pairs. Closely
spaced power and ground planes may also produce large partial mutual in-

ductance.

- Bypass the power supply inductance. Adding capacitors to the circuit enables

rapidly changing current components to be supplied close to the circuits. The
slowly changing current still comes from the power supply. This strategy works
as long as the bypass capacitors can be recharged between switching events.
The current paths for bypass capacitors are shown in Figure 3.4. Note that
the load capacitances for the off-chip drivers provide some bypass capacitance,

but the total value of capacitance is typically very small.

. Bypass the package inductance. Bypass capacitance can also be placed on the

package or on the chip to supply rapidly changing current. even closer to the

[PAGE 148]
134 Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

high di/dt
low di/dt

Figure 3.4. On-chip switching current paths for high-to-low transition with by-

passed power supply inductance.

drivers. Rail collapse can be reduced to very small levels by bypassing the

package.

7, Eliminate the package inductance entirely by directly attaching the chip to the
system card, called direct chip attach (DCA). This is a very high-performance
option that raises issues in other areas like testing, shipping, handling and

assembly, and reliability.

In practice, a combination of these strategies are used with the cost of imple
mentation regulating the relative weight of each. Low-cost approaches could use
QFP packaging with surface-mount bypass capacitors located on the motherboard.
High-cost, high-performance systems could use flip-chip BGA with integral power
and ground planes for minimal inductance, along with bypass capacitors mounted

both on the package itself aud on the motherboard.

[PAGE 149]
Section 3.1. Origins of SSN 135

3.1.2 Off-Chip Switching

For signaling from on-chip to off-chip, the on-chip drivers must. pass signals through
the package (and socket, if present) to charge and discharge off-chip capacitance.
Tracking the current paths demonstrates noise sources and suggests remedial strategies.

For switching high-to-low, the current paths are shown in Figure 3.5. With
respect to the chip, the current flows in on the signal lines and out on the ground
connection. Note that the power connection is not used. For the low-to-high case,
the currents flow in on the power connection and out on the signal lines. Because
the current loops for on-chip and off-chip signaling are different, these two aspects
of the interconnect are treated separately.

As shown in Figure 3.6, a voltage is generated on the ground inductance according to

Ugb = (£1 + Ly -- 2Mag)
Because this voltage is positive with respect to the off-chip (system) ground, the
on-chip ground moves up during a switching event. The offset in reference voltage
between on-chip and off-chip grounds is called ground bounce. For low-to-high transitions, the inrush of current causes power bounce where the on-chip power reference
moves down with respect to off-chip power.

Ground bounce affects on-chip power integrity. The on-chip supply voltage is
Vs ~ Ugh, 80 ground bounce directly causes rail collapse. Rail collapse due to off-chip

signaling can be reduced by:

1. Reducing the driver edge rates. The slowest edges that still meet timing pro-

duce the least noise.

2. Reducing the loop inductance of the package. The partial self-inductances can

be reduced and/or the partial mutual inductance can, be increased,

3. Adding on-chip and/or on-package bypass capacitance. The current paths

sketched in Figure 3.7 show that on-chip bypass enables the power connec-

[PAGE 150]
136 Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

Vdd Ys L Charging

Driver 1

Ci 0

Figure 3.5. Driver 1 current paths for switching an off-chip receiver from high to

low.

Vad Vss i=

Driver |

Figure 3.6. Ground bounce and quiet line noise holding low for high-to-low tran-

sitions.

[PAGE 151]
37
Section 3.1. Origins of SSN 1

Vad Vs

Additional Charging Loop
L

System

Figure 3.7. Off-chip switching current paths with on-package or on-chip capaci-

tance.

tion to be used in addition to the ground connection. The extra path enables
noise to be shared between the power and ground connections. Bypass capacitance in the system, located off-chip and off-package, does not help reduce
ground bounce generated on the package due to off-chip signaling. By improving the power supply, system bypass enables faster edge rates and potentially
more noise. Power bounce similarly creates rail collapse and can be addressed

through the same techniques.

Ground bounce also affects off-chip signal integrity. Driver 2 holding low in
Figure 3.6 is, in effect, signaling the on-chip ground potential to the off-chip receiver.
which interprets the signal with respect to the off-chip ground potential. Ground
bounce confuses this exchange by causing Ugb, Instead of zero, to be signaled to
the receiver. This unwanted signal is called quiet line noise. If the quiet line noise
is sufficiently large, the receiver can interpret the voltage as a logic 1 instead of a

logic 0, and a false signal results. Quiet line noise decreases as ground bounce is

[PAGE 152]
138 Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

reduced. In addition, quiet line noise is the ground bounce after filtering by the
load capacitance, so large capacitive loads tend to see less quiet line noise. Faster
systems require less capacitance, so these are more susceptible to quiet line noise.
Quiet line noise is also referred to as transmitted noise since the noise is transmitted
from on-chip to off-chip.

Just as ground bounce causes quiet line noise for signals holding low, power
bounce causes quiet line noise for signals holding high. Simulations and measurements should check both cases against the signaling specification.

Since quiet line noise occurs during signal transitions after the clock edge, synchronous circuits are generally not sensitive to it as long as the waveforms are settled
before the next clock edge. However, asynchronous circuits, such as interrupts and

resets, are susceptible to quiet line noise at any time.

Uniqueness

It is important to emphasize that the real physical effects that affect system operation are rail collapse and quiet line noise. Strictly speaking, ground bounce is
the voltage drop across the ground inductance; however, the ground inductance is
actually a partial inductance (see chapter 5), and partial inductance is not unique.
Therefore, ground bounce is not unique. Similarly, power bounce is not unique. In
contrast, rail collapse and quiet line noise are unique because they are dependent
on closed-loop inductance, which is unique. Measurements and simulations should
always target rail collapse and quiet line noise. For additional information on this

topic, see section 5.10.

3.1.3 Example SPICE Simulations

To demonstrate the effects of SSN, SPICE simulations based on the schematic of
Figure 3.2 are presented. The circuit includes three signal lines rather than two so
that an active signaling line can be simulated along with lines holding high and

low. The receivers are modeled as 2opF capacitors to power and ground for bus-like

[PAGE 153]
Section 3.1. Origins of SSN 139

loading levels. The total AC load of 50pF must be split if the effects of bypass
capacitors are to be investigated. When the total capacitive loading is applied only
to ground, perfect bypass is assumed.

The sample circuit is provided in full in Appendix C. While all of the magnitudes
are selected to be realistic, this circuit cannot exhibit the full range of behavior
that can be expected. Any observations of noise and noise mitigation cannot be
considered to be general or directly applicable to any other circuit.

The voltage at the capacitive loading of the actively switching line is shown in
Figure 3.8 for several bypass schemes. To facilitate comparisons between the waveforms, a 4V running offset is applied. With no bypass, the active waveform exhibits
overshoot and some ringing. Comparison with the other waveforms shows that the
edge rate is slowed. Adding off-chip bypass reduces these effects to almost imperceptible levels, so the bulk of these effects are due to the power supply inductance.

With on-chip bypass, overshoot and edge rate degradation disappears, but higher

no bypass

off-chip bypass

Voltage, V

on-chip bypass

on- and offchip bypass

0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Time, ns

Figure 3.8. Example SPICE simulations of the voltage at an off-chip capacitive

load generated by an actively switching packaged on-chip driver. The waveforms

are separated by 4V offsets.

[PAGE 154]
140 Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

frequency ringing is induced due to the interaction between the on-chip capacitance
and the package and source inductance. With both on-chip and off-chip bypass, the
active waveform is very clean.

The rail voltage on-chip is shown in Figure 3.9, where a 1V running offset is used
to separate the waveforms. With no bypass, the deviation from the 3.3V supply level
is quite severe. Adding off-chip bypass capacitance reduces, but does not. eliminate,
the noise because of the noise induced on the package inductance. On the other hand,
on-chip bypass by itself almost completely eliminates the rail noise. With sufficient
on-chip bypass, off-chip bypass makes no discernable difference. It is interesting
to note that the off-chip bypass is 1000 times larger than the on-chip bypass, but
cannot do a fraction of the job.

The voltage at the capacitive loading of the driver holding low is shown in
Figure 3.10, where a 0.3V running offset is used to separate the waveforms. With
no bypass, the quiet line deviates from the expected voltage of zero by =~ +0.1V.

This low level will not cause false switching of receivers, but then, only one driver

no bypass

off-chip bypass

Voltage, V

on-chip bypass

on- and off-chip bypass

Figure 3.9. Example SPICE simulations of the on-chip power supply voltage (the

rail voltage, or Vaq -- Ves) for a packaged device with active off-chip drivers. The

waveforms are separated by 1V offsets.

[PAGE 155]
Section 3.1. Origins of SSN 141

1.2
fl no bypass

0.8
> off-chip bypass
% 0.6
S 0.4 on-chip bypass

0.2

on- and off-chip bypass
-0.2
0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Figure 3.10. Example SPICE simulations of the voltage at an off-chip capacitive load generated by a packaged on-chip driver holding low. The waveforms are

separated by 0.3V offsets.

is switching. When tens to hundreds of drivers switch simultaneously, the noise can
become substantial. With off-chip bypass, the noise waveform is modified, but the
peak excursion is only marginally reduced. The same is true for on-chip bypass. The
quiet line holding-low noise is only substantially reduced when both on-chip and
off-chip bypass capacitance are used.

The voltage at the capacitive loading of the driver holding high is shown in
Figure 3.11, where a 1V Tunning offset is used to separate the waveforms. With no
bypass, the quiet line deviates from the supply voltage by = +0.3V, which is much
larger than that for the holding-low noise due to noise introduced on the supply
inductance. With off-chip bypass, this noise is minimized so that the holding-high
noise drops to + +0.1V, which is similar to the holding-low noise, The on-chip bypass also effectively bypasses the supply noise inductance but does not achieve lower
quiet line noise. Inclusion of both on_ and off-chip bypass capacitance minimizes the
holding-high noise to a level and waveform similar to the holding-low noise.

Note that the bypass capacitances essentially eliminate the rail noise but only

[PAGE 156]
142 Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

7
65 no bypass
6
> 5.5 off-chip bypass
%
Xe)
7 4.5 on-chip bypass
4
3.5 on- and off-chip bypass
3
0 5 10 15 20 25 30

Time, ns

Figure 3.11. Example SPICE simulations of the voltage at an off-chip capacitive load generated by a packaged on-chip driver holding high. The waveforms are
separated by 1V offsets.

cuts the quiet line noise by about a factor of 2. For on-chip signaling, rail noise can
be reduced to arbitrarily low levels with sufficient bypass. For off-chip signaling,
signals must traverse the package, but the bypass capacitance enables the power and
ground paths to be used together for lower inductance. In this example, symmetry

cuts the inductance almost in half, leading to a drop in SSN of about half.

3.2. Effective Inductance

Rapidly changing currents passing through packages, sockets. and connectors gen-

erate switching noise according to

di
Vesn = Ler --~, .
SSN fa (3.1)

where Leg is the effective inductance of the path through which the current passes.
The effective inductance varies according to the path. For on-chip SSN , the path
is the loop formed by the power and ground leads. For off-chip SSN, there are two

[PAGE 157]
143

Section 3.2. Effective Inductance

Legs: one for low-to-high transitions, where the path is the loop formed by the
power and signal leads, and the other for high-to-low transitions, where the path is
the loop formed by the signal and ground leads. Usually, Leg for on-chip switching
is very small (as low as 80pH for a C4-CBGA), while the Legs for off-chip switching
are asymmetrical and much larger. The asymmetry occurs because there are often
more ground leads than power leads.

The off-chip Legs also vary depending on how many off-chip drivers are simultaneously switching and in what direction. If some drivers are switching low-to-high,
there is some cancellation of noise with those switching high-to-low. The two worst
cases occur when all of the drivers are switching low-to-high or high-to-low.

The on-chip Leg plus the two worst-case off-chip Legs form a set of three metrics
that encapsulate much of the performance of a package (or socket, or connector,
etc.). Higher Leg means higher SSN. Comparisons between packages can be meaningfully made by computing and comparing Legs. In contrast, comparisons of lead
partial self-inductance are not meaningful and can easily lead to improper conclu-

sions (such as that one package is "better" than another when it is really not).

3.2.1 Computing Worst-Case Legs

Given a partial inductance matrix for a package (or socket, or edge connector, etc.},
effective inductances can be computed with the simple matrix operations derived
in chapter 4, section 4.5.2. Since the power leads are connected in parallel both on
the chip and on the system board, they can be paralleled together to obtain a single
effective power lead. Similarly, the ground lead can be paralleled to obtain a single
effective ground lead.

The worst-case off-chip switching scenario occurs when all signals swing either
low-to-high or high-to-low. In these cases, it can be assumed (with some introduction of error) that if all of the simultaneously switching drivers maintain the same
voltage on each signal throughout the transition, then the leads with simultaneously

switching drivers can be paralleled together. While this assumption is strong, there

[PAGE 158]
Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

144

is little analytical alternative, and it does provide for reasonable agreement with

detailed simulations and measurements.

Once the paralleling operations are completed, the result is a reduced 3 x 3

partial inductance matrix:

L, Msp Msg
Lparalleled => Msp Ly Mog
Meg Mog Ly

where L, represents the partial self-inductance of all of the signal leads paralleled
together, L, represents the paralleled power leads, and L, represents the paralleled
ground leads. The on-chip effective inductance is the inductance of the loop formed
by the power and ground leads, and is given by Leap = Ly +L, --2Mpg. The off-chip
effective inductance for low-to-high SSN is given by the loop formed between the
power and signals, and is given by Legtu = Ly + Ls, ~ 2Mz,. Finally, the off-chip
effective inductance for high-to-low SSN is given by the loop formed between the
signals and ground, and is given by Lean = Ly + Lg -- 2Mszy.

The three Legs form a metric that enables comparison between components.
For example, assume that two packages are fully characterized. leading to Leg.pi =
0.08nH, Ler iH1 = 0.3nH, and vef.HL1 = 0.25nH for the first package, and for the
second package Leg p2 = 0.1nH, Leg uH2 = 0.25nH, and Lew ype = 0.25nH. The
following conclusions would be reasonable. The first package will produce less rail
noise than the second by virtue of its lower Leg,p; the second package will produce
less quiet line noise for low-to-high transitions since Leg .uni > ber LHe; and the
two packages will produce about equal quiet line noise high-to-low. Which package
is better? It depends on whether rail collapse or quiet line noise is more important

for a given application.

[PAGE 159]
Section 3.3. Off-Chip SSN Dependencies 145

3.3. Off-Chip SSN Dependencies

For off-chip switching, SSN dependencies can be investigated' by considering the
effect of noise on MOSFET saturation current in CMOS totem-pole drivers. The
low-to-high and high-to-low cases are similar, so just the high-to-low case is treated.
A driver can source only so much current from the signal line to ground, so the rate
of discharge of a capacitive load is restricted to the saturation current of the pulldown MOSFET. Note that the discharge rate is not the RC time constant of the
capacitive load in series with the driver's pull-down impedance.

Without short-channel effects, the saturation current for a MOSFET is given by
. 1
Usat = 3K Was --_ Vr _ Vesn)', (3.2)

where Veg is the gate-to-source voltage, Vp is the process-dependent threshold
voltage of the pull-down MOSFET, and K = woe This equation is normally
presented under zero noise conditions with Vesn = 0. For a worst-case scenario with
N drivers simultaneously switching, the total current would be N times higher. To
compute the noise with the effective inductance using (3.1), the time rate of current
is required. Approximating di/dt ~ Ai/At, where Ai = Niza, and At = t 7 is the
fall time of the signal transition, then combining (3.2) and (3.1) yields

NIK (Ves ~ Vr -- Vegn)?

3, (3.3)

Vssn =

Solving (3.3) for Vgsn produces

_ tf NLheg@K
Vssn = Was -- Vr) + ype (2-4 ates vn Sak) ; (3.4)

where Leg is from the high-to-low switching case.
High-speed drivers are often designed to achieve a given impedance, such as 509,
to source match a transmission line. If it is assumed that the pull-down impedance

is given as Z = Vpn/isat, then K can be estimated given the impedance and the
1. R. Senthinathan and J. L. Prince, "Simultaneous switching ground noise calculation for pack-

aged CMOS devices," JEEE Trans. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 26, no. 11, Nov. 1991, pp. 1724-28.

[PAGE 160]
146 Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

supply voltage, Vp p. Applying this information to (3.2) under zero noise conditions,

then

-- 2£(Vas ~-- Vr)?"

K

Ves can usually be taken as equal to Vnp, and Vr is process-dependent (but. very

approximately equal to Vpp/5). Finally, the fall time, ty, can be estimated, but

the best approach is to simulate the edge rate of the driver using a SPICE or IBIS
model with a typical load.

With good estimates of effective inductance, fall time, driver impedance, and

threshold voltage, (3.4) can provide reasonably accurate estimates of SSN. In many

cases, the formula can be used to rough out designs or noise mitigation strategies.

3.3.1 Feedback and Saturation

The SSN formula in (3.4) shows that SSN is not linearly dependent on any of the
user-controlled quantities like power supply, number of switching drivers, effective
inductance, or fall time. Without calculation, it can be difficult to estimate the effect
of changes in the system. A feedback loop exists where SSN causes rail collapse,
leading to less drive strength in the driver, and then lower noise: the lower noise
then causes less rail collapse, more drive, and higher noise. The system reaches an
equilibrium between rail collapse and SSN due to the feedback between rail collapse
and driver strength.

Feedback causes saturation in SSN with increasing numbers of simultaneously
switching drivers. As the number of simultaneously switching drivers increases, SSN
increases at a sublinear rate. The general dependence of SSN on N is shown in
Figure 3.12, where the linear dependence on N is maintained only when few drivers
are switching. Saturation is typically a beneficial phenomenon as most systems rely

on it to keep noise levels from exceeding margins.

[PAGE 161]
Section 3.4. SSN-Induced Skew 147

Nonlinear Region (Large Rail Collapse) J

WW Linear Region (Small Rail Collapse)

Quiet Line Noise

Number of Switching Drivers

Figure 3.12. SSN saturates for high numbers of simultaneously switching drivers.

3.4 SSN-Induced Skew

SSN is noise, and like all other sources of noise, it can cause the movement of
waveform edges, leading to skew. Skew from SSN is treated like that from any other

source and is discussed in chapter 2, section 2.8.3.

3.5 Fast Simulation of Banks

A basic SSN simulation of an N-driver system would include an N-line interconnect
model, N driver model instances, N driver loadings, plus a model of the power
distribution system. For large N and complex driver models. this approach can
become intractable due to the large number of elements in the circuit simulation.
In addition, simulations with large numbers of driver instances may have difficulty
converging due to nonlinearities and discontinuities in the driver transistor models.

The worst-case SSN event occurs when all drivers in a bank switch simultane
ously in the same direction. A common occurrence is when all the lines on a wide
microprocessor data bus switch from low to high (or vice versa). For these cases, the
driver can be approximated to dramatically speed up computation time and perhaps
eliminate convergence problems. The basic idea is to model one driver in detail and
then to copy its behavior using current-controlled current sources (CCCS). A set of
CCCSs that duplicate a driver is called a current mirror. The bank is then modeled
by one detailed driver and many Current mirrors, plus detailed drivers holding high

and/or low to capture quiet line noise.

[PAGE 162]
Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

148
Vdd
In Out
Vss
(a) (b)
2
FI
5 1 3
F4 F2
F3
4
(c)

Figure 3.13. Driver and its current mirror: (a) original driver, (b) driver with 0V
voltage sources used to detect current drawn by the driver node, (c) current mirror

that duplicates the current draw of the real driver at some other place in the circuit.

The total effect of the current mirrors is to create a noise environment of an
entire bank simultaneously switching, so the noise affects the behavior of the driver
modeled in detail. Therefore, the all-important feedback mechanism is captured.
While the use of current mirrors involves many approximations and limitations,
as discussed below, the method provides very good results. Because of potential
convergence difficulties or long runtimes, the use of current mirrors may be the only
way to complete the simulation.

The implementation of a current mirror is demonstrated using SPICE elements.
Assume that a driver has power, ground, input, and output leads as shown in
Figure 3.13. The generalization to more complex drivers with additional leads is
straightforward. The current drawn by the driver node is detected by OV voltage

sources placed on each branch of the node. Current-controlled current sources then

[PAGE 163]
Section 3.5. Fast Simulation of Banks 149

duplicate these currents at another node, thereby duplicating the driver. A SPICE

netlist to implement the current mirror looks like

* The detailed SPICE driver model

Xdriver h d b f driver

* The current detectors
Viabo
VW2cdaa
V3 e f 0
V4 gh O

* The current mirror
Fi 21V11
F231 V2 1
F3 41V3 1
F451 V4 1

-Subckt driver in out vdd vss

-@nds driver

Since nonlinear driver models are often slow to simulate, a bank of N + 1 si-

multaneously switching drivers (in the same direction) can be rapidly simulated by

[PAGE 164]
150 Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

Quiet
Driver

Active
Driver

Current Multipliers

Figure 3.14. Switched bank with active driver mirrored by N current mirrors.

replacing N of the drivers with current mirrors, as shown in Figure 3.14, where two
detailed driver instances simulate precise driver behavior while N current mirrors
simulate the effects of many others.

Current mirrors can be used with any interconnect and loading as long as all
loads on all drivers are nominally identical. With variance in the loadings, the active
driver should see typical loading to average out the effects of large and small loading,
which should still be reasonably similar. Current mirrors also force all of the drivers
to switch at precisely the same time, so skew in driver switching time cannot. be
modeled.

As an example, the schematic of Figure 3.14, using socket inductance to intro-

[PAGE 165]
151

Section 3.6. Exercises

Holding High

All Drivers ----

21 Mirrors
Active Line

Voltage, V

Time, ns

Figure 3.15. Active and quiet waveforms from a SPICE simulation using 24 detailed drivers compared to a simulation with 3 detailed drivers and 21 current

mirrors.

duce SSN, is simulated with 24 drivers driving 50pF loads. One driver holds high
and another low, leaving the other 22 actively switching low-to-high, then highto-low. The system is simulated first with all 24 drivers modeled in detail with
nonlinear MOSFET models, then a second simulation repiaces 21 of the drivers
with current mirrors that track the one remaining actively switching driver, so just
3 of the drivers are modeled in detail with MOSFETs. The results in F igure 3.15
show that the SPICE simulation with current mirrors compares very well to the

simulation with all of the drivers modeled in detail.

3.6 Exercises

1. (a) Based on the schematic in Figure 3.3, sketch the current paths for on-chip

signaling for the low-to-high transition.

(b) Repeat with bypassed power supply.

[PAGE 166]
152

Simultaneous Switching Noise Chapter 3

(c) Repeat with bypassed package and power supply.

(a) Based on the schematic in Figure 3.5, sketch the current paths for off-chip
signaling for the low-to-high transition.

(b) Repeat with bypassed power supply.

(c) Repeat with bypassed package and power supply.

. Sketch the current paths for SSN events for off-chip signaling with a termi-

nated current-mode driver. How will the noise compare to that generated by

a single-ended driver?

. Set up and run SPICE simulations of SSN similar to those in section 3.1.3.

based on the netlist in Appendix C, to investigate the effect of edge rates.
Vary the edge rate of the driver and plot peak SSN vs. edge rate. What do

the results imply about edge rates?

. Estimate Vssn using (3.4) for each edge rate in problem 4. How accurate are

the estimates? Are the trends correct?

. Derive a formula similar to (3.4) to estimate Vesn for a packaged device with

two buses with different driver strengths sharing a common ground.

. What is the minimum number of current sources needed to implement the

current mirror in Figure 3.13? Why?

[PAGE 167]
Chapter 4

MULTIPORT CIRCUITS

Digital systems are interconnected with many parallel connections to increase the
system throughput. Interconnect widths typically fall on byte boundaries, so interfaces are commonly 8-bit, 16-bit, 32-bit, 64-bit, and so on. Parity bits, at one per
byte, can significantly increase width. For example, a typical address bus for a 32-bit
microprocessor could include 32 bits for the address, 4 address parity bits, 64 data
bits (double the 32-bit data word for double the throughput). 8 data parity bits.
some control bits like CAS, RAS, and WE, plus CLK for a total of over 100 connections. For interconnect analysis, it is essential that all modeling and simulation

techniques accommodate large numbers of coupled connections.

4.1 Z- and Y-Parameters

For circuit analysis, an interconnect model must relate voltage and current. For the
general N-port circuit of Figure 4.1, the voltages and current are related by the

N x N impedance matrix, Z, defined by

Vi 4410 242 ++ By qh
Ve 2 2g, 222 +++ Zon Ip
Vn Zn1 Zn2 +++ Zywn In

153

[PAGE 168]
154 Multiport Circuits Chapter 4

I

1
Vv, _
Vv 2
;
Vi,0> 5
|
=
i)
a
VN OS zZ

Figure 4.1. Voltage and current convention for a general N-port network.

where

is a vector representing the voltage on each of the N lines, and J similarly represents

the current on each of the N lines. Using a compact vector/tensor notation, then

NI

V=ZT. (4.1)

The important feature of (4.1) is that Z is an N x N square matrix. Since
reciprocity applies for the passive materials used in interconnects, Z;; = Z;; and
there are N self terms on the diagonal and N (.V ~ 1)/2 unique coupling terms off of
the diagonal. When the coupling is negligible between two ports 7 and j, then Z;;
can be set to zero. Since interconnects are designed to pack many conductors into
a small volume, many coupling terms are usually required. In some package styles,
such as QFPs, often all of the off-diagonal terms are required. It is a rare event that
only the self terms are needed.

Without loss of generality, the currents can be related to the voltages by the

[PAGE 169]
155

Section 4.2. S-Parameters

N x N admittance matrix, Y, defined by
qi Yu Yio oc) Yin Vi
In | Yo. Yoo ++: Yon Vo
In Yni Yno +++ Yun Vn
or
T=YV. (4.2)

Like the impedance matrix, the admittance matrix is reciprocal. The admittance
and impedance matrices are the inverse of each other: Z = an and ¥ = Z Ifa
datum node has not been defined, then the matrix inverse does not exist.

For the most general case, each element Z,; j of the impedance matrix is frequencydependent. Special techniques may be required to accommodate frequencydependent impedance matrices in time-domain simulators. If the bandwidth requirements of the simulation are modest, then the lumped approximation may hold,
leading to frequency-independent matrix elements (to a good approximation). A

similar discussion applies to the admittance matrix.

4.2 S-Parameters

At high frequencies, voltage becomes nonunique because of its path dependence. An
alternative formulation for circuits can be based on the amplitudes and phases of
voltage traveling waves (see chapter 2, section 2.1.3) scattered from the device under test (DUT). By separating signals into directional wave components, uniqueness
problems with voltage are avoided. Scattering parameters (S-parameters) are convenient for two other reasons: laboratory equipment is commercially available covering
as low as 300kHz to greater than 100GHz, and general-purpose electromagnetic simulators usually produce their results in the form of S-parameters. Familiarity with
S-parameters is required to successfully apply high-frequency equipment and simulators. S-parameters can easily be converted into impedance and/or admittance

parameters if needed, but modeling can proceed in S-parameters if desired.

[PAGE 170]
156 Multiport Circuits Chapter 4

4.2.1 Definition

Consider a black box with N ports providing access to the circuits inside. As
sketched in Figure 4.2, at each port i a steady-state wave propagates towards the
box on a transmission line with characteristic impedance Z,;, and a wave also propagates away, having either been reflected by the black box or having been launched
by the black box itself. By convention, the waves traveling towards port i are labeled
as a;, while the waves propagating away from the black box on port z are labeled as
b;. S-parameters are defined by relating the "reflected" b; waves to the "incident"

a; waves according to

by Sir Sig +++ Sun ay
be S21 Seq +++ Son a2

= oo. i. (4.3)
by Sui Sno --+ Snw an

Using a compact vector /tensor notation, then 6 = Sa, where S$ is the S-parameter
matrix. If b; = 0, then there is no reflected wave on the transmission line feeding

port 7 and the port is said to be matched.

be
S
==)
at
4
&
|
pa

Figure 4.2. A black box circuit can be characterized by the waves incident to and

reflected from the box's ports.

[PAGE 171]
157

Section 4.2. S-Parameters

The voltage waves are related to the incident and reflected waves by the characteristic impedance of the transmission line connecting the port. If Vr designates

the incident voltage wave at port 7, then
yt

OS Zoi'

where Z; is the (real) characteristic impedance of the transmission line connected

to port 7. Similarly, the reflected voltage wave is related to 5; by
Vo
b = .
V Zoi

The power propagating towards the black box on port i is

1 .
PY = 5M (ET)
+\* [Fo o.\*
= ui(Z } = 5 VE, G2")
= lad? (4.4)

for Zo; = Z3,, i.e., real. Similarly, Po = [b;|. Therefore, by basing the definition
of S-parameters on a and b rather than V+ and V~, calculations involving power
avoid the need to know the characteristic impedances of the feed lines. For example,
the gain of a two-port circuit for a signal entering port 1 and leaving port 2 is
Py _ dba _ |SnaP
Pt hla, |a,|?

assuming S22 = 0 (matched).

= |S21|?,

Measurements and simulations of S-parameters automatically incorporate the
effects of the characteristic impedance of the lines driving the ports. For example,
the reflection coefficient ($11) of a resistor depends on the characteristic impedance
of the transmission line driving it. For a 502 resistor, the reflection coefficient is
(50 -- 75) /(50+75) = --0.2 when measured from a 75Q. line, but it is (50 --50)/(50+
50) = 0 when measured from a 502 line. Since the effects of the transmission line
characteristic impedances are "built into" the S-parameters, they are termed unnormalized. Section 4.4 shows that S-parameters can be normalized to any convenient

characteristic impedance for easier use.

[PAGE 172]
158 Multiport Circuits Chapter 4

4.2.2. Circuit Calculations with S-Parameters

5-parameters can be incorporated into circuit analyses by relating the incident and
reflected waves to the voltages and currents. First, Kirchhoff's voltage and current
laws are used to find all voltage and current relationships. Second, the voltages
and currents are eliminated with their traveling wave representations in (2.27) and

(2.28), often with the convenient selection of z = 0. The voltage on port 7 is
Via VI 4VE = WZ ai + VW Zoi bi.

while the current flowing into the port is
=It+r =% _Y, _ Qj _ bj

Zoi Loi 7 V Zoi V Zoi ,

Finally, the equations are rearranged to allow the identification of the S-parameters.

As an example, consider the derivation of the two-port S-parameters for the

series inductor in Figure 4.3. The voltage and current at port 1 are

Vi = av Zo + bi Zar
ai/V Zo -- bf A Zor,

fy

while at port 2,

V2 = aeW Zoo + be Zog
Ly = def WV Zoz -- be/ sf Zoo.

Applying Kirchhoff's voltage law around the loop formed by the inductor and

the ends of the transmission lines yields

a1VZo1 + bi Zo. = wl (a1/v Zor -- by /¥ Zo1) + A2V Zo2 + baW/ Zoo.

I, L I,
5 eI Om
i + + --_
Zol =b, "i Vz can £2

Figure 4.3. Setup for computing the S-parameters of a series inductor.

[PAGE 173]
159

Section 4.3. Multiport Conversions Between S-, Y-, and Z-Parameters

Conservation of charge requires that £; = --I2, so
ay/V Zo -- bf V Zor = --G2/ V Zo2 + ba/ Vf Zoo.

Eliminating b2 yields

Zo2 _ Lol + qol 2¥v Zol Lo2

>, 4+ SS ey,
Zol + 4o2 + jul : 4ol + Zo2 + gu

b=

while eliminating 6; yields

2y Lol Zo2 Zol _ Lo2 + JWL

= a Qo.
be Zor t+ Zor+qwk |" Bo + Zon+ wh

The S-parameters can be picked off by inspection according to the definition in

(4.3), and the result is

Zo2--Zoitywh __ 27251252
4oitfootjwh ZoitZortqwh

2YZ 51209 4oi-ZoatjwLh
ZatZo2tjqwLh Zoi +252 tw L

call
I

Due to the symmetry in the circuit, the ports can be swapped by interchanging Z,;
and Z,2. Note also that Sj. = S21, reflecting the reciprocity of a passive network,

and that interchanging Z,, and Z,. has no effect on these.

4.3 Multiport Conversion Between S-, Y-, and
Z-Parameters

Since the impedance and admittance matrices are related by inversion, only conversions involving S-parameters are needed. Two conversions are derived. First, the
characteristic impedances of the transmission lines driving the ports are assumed
to be equal. Second, this restriction is relaxed so that each transmission line can
have a unique characteristic impedance.

It is assumed that the N. -port impedance matrix is known and that the N-
port S-parameter matrix is required. Transmission lines with a (real) characteristic
impedance of Z, are used to drive each port, so the voltages at the N-ports can be

written as

[PAGE 174]
160 Multiport Circuits Chapter 4

Yi = V Zo(ai + 61)
Vo = VZ,(a2 + be)

Vy = VZ.(an + by). (4.5)

This can be compactly writtcn as

V= V/Z,(a +b). (4.6)
Similarly, the currents can be written as
T= --~(a-3). (4.7)
VZo

Substituting (4.6) and (4.7) into (4.1) yields

The definition for S-parameters, b = 5 @, can be used to eliminate b to get
Z,(1 + S\a = ZT -- S\a,

where 7 is the identity matrix. Then in general, the conversion from S to Z is given
by

Z=Z,(1+S8)0--8)-. (4.8)
Note the similarity of (4.8) to the result from transmission line theory in equation (2.40), where the impedance is related to the reflection coefficient by Z =

2,(1+T)/(1~--I). The conversion from Z to § is found from (4.8) as
1)"\(Z ~ ZT). (4.9)

= = =-1 =
Once Z is known, then Y = Z . Dedicated formulas for Y can be easily derived.
These conversions show that S-parameters can be converted directly into imped-

ance or admittance parameters at any time, assuming that the necessary matrix

[PAGE 175]
161

Section 4.4. Normalization of S-Parameters

inversions exist. In this sense, S-, Y-, and Z-parameters are equivalent, and conversions between them can be made as needed.

The restriction that all of the transmission lines driving the ports must have
the same characteristic impedance can be relaxed to derive slightly more complex

conversions. For a single port, V = VZ(a +5), so the extension to multiple ports is

V =k(a+5), (4.10)
where
Vv Zol 0 0
= 0 Lo2 0)
k=
0 0 Zon

Similarly, the currents at the ports are given by
-- =--l1 -
F=k (a@--8). (4.11)
Substituting (4.10) and (4.11) into (4.1) yields

1

(G+b)=Zk (a--bd). (4.12)

asl|

By the definition of S-parameters, 6 = Sa, then 5 can be eliminated in (4.12) to

obtain the conversion from Z to S as
S=(Zk +k) (Zk --®. (4.13)
The result can be rearranged to find the conversion from StoZ as

+S)(7 --5)7}

Nil
cal
ml
il

(

(4.14)

4.4 Normalization of S-Parameters

S-parameters are dependent on the characteristic impedances of the transmission

lines used to drive the ports; if the impedances change, the S-parameters change. It is

[PAGE 176]
162 Multiport Circuits Chapter 4

often convenient to recompute S-parameters for different characteristic impedances,
and it is standard practice to convert S-parameters to a form where all ports are
driven from a transmission line of the same characteristic impedance, with 502 being
the most common. S-parameters that have been recomputed to such a standard are
said to be normalized. In practice, it is rare to encounter anything but normalized
5-parameters. S-parameters measured with a calibrated 50Q network analyzer are
automatically normalized to 500.

Assume that the original S-parameters are given by Si normalized by ky and
that the desired S-parameters are So normalized to ko, where Si, Ii, and ko are
known. Since A is invariant to S-parameter normalization, the impedance matrices

for Ss and So, computed from (4.14), can be equated to obtain
ki(Z + S1)(1 -- 5,)~*ky = ko(T + So)(T -- So) ho.
Solving for Se yields

)T-5:) kik, + %o]7!

ty
ho
tl
=
uu

_ Si) --3,) kk -- Fe). (4.15)

An interesting application for (4.15) is adjusting measured S-parameters for
slight offsets in calibration standards. The short-open-load-through (SOLT) calibration technique relies on a precision load, typically 502, to which the reference
impedance is set. If the load value is off, then all of the S-parameters will also be off
because any user will assume the "perfect" reference value. For example, a calibration standard may be trimmed to +1%, so while the measured S-parameters could
be normalized to 50.59, any user would assume normalization to exactly 500. A
precision DC measurement would provide an accurate value for the load, and (4.15)
could be applied to adjust the measured 5-parameters from the slightly offset values
to precisely 502.

As a simple example of renormalization, consider a short section of 75Q trans-

mission line terminated in 502. The reflection coefficient. is

50 -- 75
Sy = P= pg
50475 0.2

[PAGE 177]
163

Section 4.5. Matrix Reductions

This $-parameter is normalized to 759. Applying (4.15) to renormalize to 500 yields

= (V75(1 -- 0.2)/(1 + 0.2)/75/50 + V50)7!
(W75(1 -- 0.2)/(1 + 0.2)\/75/50 -- 50)

= 0.

S14

renorm

The renormalized S-parameter is now zero and shows that the reflection from a

matched termination is zero.

4.5 Matrix Reductions

When terminal characteristics at certain ports are known, the information can be
built into the matrix to reduce its size. The two basic cases are when the excitation
on a port is zero and when ports share excitation. Null excitation can occur when
a port is short-circuited (zero voltage), open-circuited (zero current), or matched
(zero incident wave). Common excitation can occur when ports are tied together

(equal voltage, or paralleled leads).

4.5.1 Null Excitation

Consider the S-parameter matrix in (4.3). If port 7 is connected to a matched load,
then a; = 0, and column j in S has no impact on 6. Therefore, there is no change
in 6 if a; is deleted from @ and column j is deleted from 5S. Typically, there is no
interest in b;, so row j in 6 and S can be deleted. Therefore, if port j is matched
in the characteristic impedance of the system, then the S-parameter matrix can be
simplified to take this into account by deleting row j and column j from the matrix.

For the impedance matrix in (4.1), the analogous excitation is that port 7 is
open-circuited so that J; = 0. Therefore, the impedance matrix can be simplified by
deleting the rows and columns of ports that are open-circuited. Similarly, deleting
the rows and columns of the admittance matrix from (4.2) simplifies the matrix for
ports that are shorted to ground.

Note that the conversions in section 4.3 can be used to move a matrix in to and

[PAGE 178]
164 Multiport Circuits Chapter 4

out of convenient forms for reduction. For example, if a port is to be shorted to
ground for an impedance matrix, it can be inverted to admittance, processed, and
then inverted back.

Row and column deletion can be efficiently programmed with a straightforward
indexing scheme, but it is convenient for discussion to have a mathematical description for the process based on matrix multiplication. The jth row and column of an

N x N matrix B can be deleted to produce a new (N -- 1) x (N -- 1) matrix B

through the operation

--' --T-- =

B=A BA, (4.16)
where A is an N x (N --1) matrix formed by deleting column j of the N x N identity
matrix. If several rows and columns are to be deleted from B, (4.16) can be applied

just once with multiple columns deleted from A.

4.5.2 Common Voltage Excitation

When the voltages at two or more ports are forced to be equal, such as by shorting
them together, the admittance matrix for the network can be processed to incorporate the information. The operation is useful to convert several parallel leads,
such as multiple ground connections, into a single lead for faster simulation with
the model.

The goal is to convert an N x N admittance matrix into a new M x M admittance matrix, where M < N. The voltages at each of the N -ports of the original
admittance matrix, Y., are mapped to one of the M ports on the new admittance

matrix, Yn, using an N x M incidence matrix, A:
Vo=AVn. (4.17)
A is constructed by inspection. The currents are related by

T, =A T, (4.18)

to satisfy Kirchhoff's current law.

[PAGE 179]
Section 4.5. Matrix Reductions 165

The construction of the incidence matrix is more easily demonstrated than described. Consider the setup in Figure 4.4. The incidence matrix for this example

is

0
0
1
1

|

iH
eo eo en
ese C&C 2 2 CO

0

As can be seen, the voltages at the ports of the old matrix are simply assigned to
the voltages at the ports of the new matrix.

The voltages and currents are related by the admittance matrix as

oVo (4.19)

"<Il

7, =

--T
Substituting (4.17) into (4.19), multiplying by A . and then substituting (4.18)
yields

Figure 4.4. Example setup for conversion from one admittance matrix to another,

with paralleled leads built-in.

[PAGE 180]
166 Multiport Circuits Chapter 4

The new reduced admittance matrix is then

(4.20)

||

--_--
Yo

||
a

I
[|

The conversions in section 4.3 can be used to move a matrix in to and out of
convenient forms for reduction. The matrix operations in (4.20) simply add together
the rows and columus of ports that are to be tied together, and an implementation
based on this fact can be far quicker than actually performing the matrix multipli-

cations.

For inductance matrices, (4.20) represents a generalization of the formula

L 4
total > 1 1
Ti TE, to + oy

for paralleling inductors together. Note that the operation order is invert/add/invert.
In (4.20), the same is performed to parallel leads of an inductance matrix: invert from impedance to admittance, add rows and columus, and invert back to

impedance.

4.6 Exercises

1. Show that when Z is symmetric, then S is also symmetric. Recall that A B x

B A for general matrices A and B, nor for symmetric matrices.

2. Show that the power dissipated in a multiport network is P = tal (7 --
=T--*
S S )a*, where * denotes complex conjugate. Then for a lossless network,

=T--* = =* =T ,
SS =lorS =(8§ )-',
3. Show that the power dissipated in a multiport network is P =
--T --T =* --* --T --*
ral (Z 4+Z ) I. Then for a lossless network, Z +7 <0.

4. Show that the reflection coefficient looking into port 1 of a two-port network

terminated with an arbitrary load impedance at port 2isT = S$), + eas
--H22R bE"

where [',, is the reflection coefficient at the load.

[PAGE 181]
167

Section 4.6. Exercises

5. Show that a conversion from Y to S' is

Bok -Fk).

S=(k +

as

6. Show that a conversion from S to Y is

7. Multiport networks with equal numbers of input and output ports can be
cascaded as shown in Figure 4.5. The 2N x 2N S-parameter matrices can be

divided into four N x N submatrices each as

~ Sia S
3. = S1A Sip
Sic Sip
and
-- So, 5
3, = Bea P28
Sec Sap

Show that the submatrices for the S-parameter matrix formed by the cascade

of 5, and 3. are

Sa = Stat SisZ -- 824510)! S2aSic
Sp = Sia(t --S2451p)~ Sop
Sco = Sac(I -- SipSea) Sic
Sp = Sop+ SecSip (I -- B24S1p)~' Son.

Figure 4.5. Cascaded multiport S-parameters.

[PAGE 182]
168 Multiport Circuits Chapter 4

8. Multiport networks with equal numbers of input and output ports can be
connected in parallel as shown in Figure 4.6. 'the 2N x2N admittance matrices

can be divided into four N x N submatrices each as

_ Yia ¥
y= Ya Yup
Yice Yip
and
_ You Y¥
Y - ea Yep
Yao Yap

Show that the admittance matrix formed by the parallel connection of Yi and

Yo is

7 Yia +¥o4 Yip + Yop
Yie + Yoo Yip + Yop

[PAGE 183]
Section 4.6.

169

Exercises

9.

10.

Figure 4.7. Series connection of two impedance matrices.

Show that the impedance matrix of the series connection of two 2x2 impedance
matrices, as shown in Figure 4.7, is given by

42234/(Z22 + 233)
444 -- £34243/(Zo2 + Z33)

41 -- £42401/(Z22 + 233)
221243] (222 + 733)

series =

if
7, - 41 £212
42, £22
and
=> _| 433 234
-_ 443 Zaa

Given an N x N S-parameter matrix normalized to Z, on each port, show that
the new S-parameter matrix formed from adding to each port j a transmission

line with characteristic impedance Z, and phase shift 6; = Be; is

e7IA1 0 wae 0 ews 0 Lae 0
=-- 0 e702 tae 0 _ 0 e742 a 0
new --
0 0 e Jon 0 0 e7ION

Note that this conversion is frequency-dependent since { is frequency-dependent.

[PAGE 184]
170 Muitiport Circuits Chapter 4

11. (a) Show that the admittance matrix of a lossless transmission line is

TYo _-- cos( Zé) 1
sin(Gé) 1 -- cos(3é)

Y =

(b) Show that the admittance matrix of a lossy transmission line is

= h(yé --1
P= ve | cosh(at) | (4.21)
sinh(7é) -1 cosh(yé)

12. A 2cm section of transmission line is characterized at 1.79GHz with a 50Q

vector network analyzer to obtain

3 0.322871 + 70.0216587 0.06333 -- 70.0944073
0.06333 -- 70.0944073 0.322871 + 90.0216587

Find the line's characteristic impedance and effective dielectric constant.

13. Without using the result from chapter 9, equation (9.22), show that the ad-

mittance matrix for the x-network in Figure 4.8a is

7 - Yi + Yo --Y2

--Ye yo + y3

(a) (b)

Figure 4.8. Networks for implementing 2 x 2 matrices: (a) m-network for admit-

tance, (b) T-network for impedance.

[PAGE 185]
171

Section 4.6. Exercises

14. Show that the impedance matrix for the 7-network in Figure 4.8b is

2, + 2 29

Nil
|

22 Zo + 23

15. Show that the S-parameter matrix for a shunt capacitor inserted into a lossless

transmission line is

F_ 1 --jwiCZo 2
2+ jwCZo 9 ~wOZ,

[PAGE 187]
Chapter 5

INDUCTANCE

Because inductance leads directly to simultaneous switching noise (SSN) and crosstalk, it plays a central role in interconnect modeling and performance estimation
in simulations of high-speed systems. Unfortunately, inductance is a remarkably
deep subject, and it can often be difficult to apply. Because magnetic fields do not
terminate, forming only closed loops, inductance is a long-range effect that couples
together many individual lines of a multiconductor interconnect. Coupling requires
the use of mutual inductance in interconnect models, and these can dramatically
increase both model size and simulation runtime. As tempting as it may be, mutual
inductance cannot be ignored.

As an example of the effect of neglecting mutual inductance, the SSN example
from chapter 3, section 3.1.3 is recomputed without mutual inductance. The original
and recomputed results are shown in Figure 5.1, where it can be seen that neglecting
the mutual inductances causes as much as 100% error in the estimated SSN.

Maxwell's equations are the foundation of all classical work in electromagnetics and circuits. The concepts of inductance and capacitance help encapsulate the
complex general electromagnetic field phenomenon of the full set of equations to
the simpler circuit case involving Kirchhoff's voltage and current laws. Inductance
relates magnetic flux to current, while capacitance relates the electric field to charge
using voltage.

This chapter presents a thorough review of inductance and mutual inductance

along with the application of the rigorous definitions to practical aspects of mod-

173

[PAGE 188]
174 Inductance Chapter 5

no bypass

off-chip bypass

Voltage, V

_ on-chip bypass

on- and off-chip bypass

Figure 5.1. Recalculation of the plot in Figure 3.10, which is an example SPICE
simulation of the voltage at an off-chip capacitive load generated by a packaged
on-chip driver holding low. Dotted line indicates package model with mutual inductances. Solid line indicates package model without mutual inductance. The wave-

forms are separated by 0.3V offsets.

eling. The concept of partial inductance is explored in full. Common formulas and
their uses are presented. Additional theoretical treatment investigates passivity,

uniqueness, interconnect modeling, and reference.

5.1 Summary of an Electromagnetic Result

Maxwell's equations are quite flexible in their presentation, with several equivalent
forms available. For the following discussion on inductance, the form utilizing the
scalar potential and the magnetic vector potential is particularly useful. Since the
derivation is available from innumerable sources,' just the results are presented
here. Under the assumptions that the differentia] form of Maxwell's equations hold
and that the material properties are uniform, then

me
1. See for example, C. Johnk, Engineering Electromagnetic Fields and Waves, 2nd ed. New York:
Wiley, 1988, p. 546.

[PAGE 189]
175

Section 5.1. Summary of an Electromagnetic Result

B=VxA (5.1)
and
_ OA
_ _wea_ 74 5.2
E=-V@---=., (5.2)

where A is the magnetic vector potential, B is the magnetic flux density, ® is the
electric scalar potential, and F is the electric field strength. The complexity is embedded in the equations for A and ®, which for quasi-static conditions appropriate

for circuit analyses are given by

AC) An lf z an (5:3)
alll pea' i

where J is the current density and Py is the volume charge density.

and

Quasi-static fields do not appreciably change with frequency, a situation that
occurs whenever the circuit is small compared to the wavelength of the electromagnetic field. For a given size circuit, there is an upper frequency limit under
which quasi-static conditions prevail. Common rules of thumb are dmax < Amin /10
and dmax < Amin/30, where dmax is the largest circuit dimension and Amin is the
shortest wavelength of interest.

Circuits that are small for all frequency components of a signal appear to be
lumped at a particular location. Circuits satisfying quasi-static conditions for all
significant frequency components are said to be lumped components or lumped elements. While a component appears as lumped, the lumped approximation is said
to apply. Therefore, quasi-static and lumped approximation are synonymous.

Circuit modeling and simulation deals with voltages and currents. Voltage is
defined by

- [B-@, (5.4)

[PAGE 190]
176 Inductance Chapter 5

and current by

i= [ [30%

While the voltage can be computed at any frequency, it only provides a unique
answer for quasi-static fields. At high frequencies, the computed voltage depends
on the path chosen for the path integral. In contrast, current is uniquely defined by
the area, and its calculation is unambiguous at all frequencies.

While the lumped approximation holds, circuit analyses can use voltage and
current. With the loss of uniqueness for voltage at high frequencies, circuit analyses

must rely on more general concepts such as S-parameters.

5.2 Definitions of Inductance

The definition of inductance can be rigorously based on Maxwell's equations in integral form, and successful application of the inductance concept relies on careful and
strict interpretation of the meanings of closed line integrals and surface integrals.
Several definitions for inductance are possibie: thin-wire for formula development,
field-based for theoretical treatment, and energy-based for computer computation.

Each of these definitions is derived in the following sections.

5.2.1 Thin Wire Definition

Many practical applications use long thin wires, and a definition for inductance
specialized for this application is useful for deriving and cataloging formulas. In
addition, the derivation clearly demonstrates the geometrical role of inductance.

Faraday's law in integral form is

-- -- d --~ --
fra--£ [faa 3)

where #,, E - dé sums the tangential component of the electric field around a closed
path given by contour C, and ff, B-ds sums the normal component of the magnetic
flux density through the area enclosed by C. These relationships are sketched in

Figure 5.2. Substituting (5.1) into (5.5) and applying Stokes' theorem,

[PAGE 191]
Section 5.2. Definitions of Inductance 177

[ [00 A) B= p aa, (5.6)

true for any vector field A, yields

pb u=-5 p A-@.
Cc dt Jo

Under quasi-static conditions, substituting (5.3) to eliminate A gives

{Fu 7 C (E//f ora | dt.

For a circuit consisting of thin wires and small components. the current density

vanishes for points off of the contour, C, and it travels in a direction tangential to

the contour. Executing the volume integral yields the simplified form

fE-a@--£ Ag 1) | ae. (5.7)
C dt Jo \ 4a fou lr --F |

where 7 is the current on the thin wire. According to the quasi-static assumption, the

current is constant on the contour, and (5.7) can be rearranged into time-constant

and time-varying parts as

pEa--$ ta sae ) et. (5.8)

Figure 5.2. Contour and area sketch for interpretation of the integral relationships

in Faraday's law.

[PAGE 192]
178 inductance Chapter 5

The complexity of Maxwell's equations is then captured in a time-constant,

geometrically-dependent factor called inductance, defined by

png f Ee 69)
Ar ode' jrF--F |

and this formulation of L is called Neumann's inductance formula.

Circuits

The remaining electromagnetic quantity in (5.8) can be cast for circuits using the
definition of voltage in (5.4). Breaking the closed contour C' into N open segments

C;, as suggested in Figure 5.3 for NM = 8, then

N
E-de = [Bea

N
= --Sou, (5.10)
i=]

where

na-f E- dé
Ci

(a) (b)

Figure 5.3. A closed contour can be broken into any number of open contours.

[PAGE 193]
179

Section 5.2. Definitions of Inductance

Figure 5.4. Prototypical circuit incorporating voltages from a source, resistive

losses, and inductance.

are the voltage drops along each open contour segment, C;. The sum of the voltage
drops on all the segments is the voltage drop around the closed loop, C.
Incorporating (5.9) and (5.10) into (5.8) provides the classic voltage-current

relationship for inductance as

di
-- [-- 5.11
° dt' ( )

where v represents the voltage around a closed loop. So. a time-varying current
produces a voltage on the closed loop, where the value is given by the time derivative
of the current scaled by the inductance.

For the complete voltage-current relationship, consider the circuit shown in Figure 0.4, where a thin-wire loop is driven by a small voltage source, vg. The resistive
voltage drop is iR, where R is the total resistance of the thin wire, and the voltage
generated on the loop due to inductance is Le, From Kirchhoff's voltage law, the

total of all voltages sums to ZeEI0O, SO --Ug + 1A + Le = 0, or

; di
Va = iR+ Le.

Loops vs. Wire
As shown by Faraday's law, the actual cause of the induced voltage is the timevarying magnetic flux density over a surface, but inductance allows a simplification

and the use of the circuit quantity 7. Since the current flows in the wire itself, this

substitution can lead to confusion as to the source of the induced voltage and the

[PAGE 194]
180 Inductance Chapter 5

(a) (b)

Figure 5.5. Two rectangular loops of wire with equal total wire lengths enclose

different areas. The loop in (a) has much higher inductance than the loop in (b).

meaning of inductance. It is clear from the derivation that inductance is only defined
for a closed contour: it is the closed loop formed by a wire that has inductance--not
the wire itself.2 A piece of a closed loop does not have inductance, so it is incorrect
to assign inductance to a piece of wire. The geometry of the loop sets the inductance
value; the wire itself has limited impact while the thin-wire assumption holds.
Consider the two wire loops in Figure 5.5. The two wires are the same length,
but the inductances are radically different because the loop areas are very different.
Inductance is minimized by reducing the loop area for a given wire length. One
of the most effective methods for minimizing inductance is to route signals over a
ground plane so that the loop area is just the length of the net times the dielectric

thickness.

5.2.2 Field-Based Definitions

Equation (5.11) is valid in general, even though the formula for L in (5.9) is valid
only for thin wires. To obtain a more general formula valid for all cases but requiring
the use of field quantities (as all general solutions in electromagnetics must), the
right-hand side of (5.11) can be equated to the right-hand side of Faraday's law in
(5.5) to obtain

2. A common question in packaging is, What is the inductanceof a wirebond? The correct answer

is that wirebonds do not have inductance,

[PAGE 195]
181

Section 5.2. Definitions of Inductance

di dffa--
8 FI Bas. (5.12)
Lit all °

Integrating (5.12) with respect to time, and noting that the integration constant

vanishes since fields do not exist without current in the circuit, then

p= WB (5.18)
t

In terms of field quantities, inductance is given by the total flux passing through
a surface divided by the current magnitude in the circuit. producing the magnetic
flux.

A related field-based definition using the magnetic vector potential can be found

by substituting (5.1) into (5.13) and then using (5.6) to obtain

A. dé
p= kA (5.14)
é

5.2.3. Energy-Based Definition

While (5.13) is general, the reliance on the appropriate construction and application
of a surface and the related surface integral can lead to difficulties in problem
setup. Through the use of energy relationships, a field~-based inductance formulation
involving only volume integrals is possible. From circuit theory, the energy stored

in an inductor is
1
E= gl
while the result from electromagnetic field theory is

c=5// B- Hav,
2 Vv

where Hf is the magnetic field strength. Equating these two definitions and solving

for Z yields
1 ~~ ww
Las f[[ B-Rav (5.15)
t V

Because of the relative simplicity of setup, (5.15) is often used to compute inductance in general-purpose electromagnetic simulators, where the computation of the
fields over a volume is straightforward but manipulation of surface definitions is

not.

[PAGE 196]
182 Inductance Chapter 5

5.3 Definition of Mutual Inductance

Systems will typically consist of several interacting circuits, so it is necessary to
investigate the voltages induced on one circuit by the time-varying magnetic flux
densities produced by another. The derivation and concepts developed in section 5.2

for inductance are extended in this section to investigate mutual inductance.

5.3.1 Thin Wire Definition

Consider a system consisting of two closed contours that are in close proximity so
that the magnetic flux from one contour penetrates the area enclosed by the other.
This system is sketched in Figure 5.6. The total magnetic flux density is the sum

of that produced by each circuit, so B = B, + Bo. Faraday's law applied to C5 is

__ d --_ Le d --
E. =-- ff B BS ff B, -ds. 5.16
f dt J Js, * dt J Js, (5.16)

gq

Substituting (5.1) and applying Stokes' theorem from (5.6) yields

--_-- __ d -- -- d _-- __
EF. dé = ---- Ad~5 $ Aya
¢. dt Jo, dt Jo, *

Figure 5,6. Contours and area sketches for interpretation of the integral relation-

ships in Faraday's law for the case of mutual inductance.

[PAGE 197]
183

Section 5.3. Definition of Mutual Inductance

Replacing the magnetic vector potentials from (5.3) gives

pE@-- ef (EI 20 \@
ah (EL) *

For quasi-static operation with thin wires and small components, the current den-

&

a
=

(5.17)

sities vanish off of the contours, and since the current travels in the same direction

as the contours, then
¢ Edi = 4 uh ni ) ra -,
Co dt Co An C1 |r --F

d pL io(F ) >;
Eh {Ef wa): di (5.18)

The currents 4; and ig are constant on the contours according to the quasi-static

=

assumption, so (5.18) can be rearranged into time-constant and time-varying parts

as
= => diy diz
E.dé= ---M-- -- L,.--*
f. b= -M - 122, (5.19)
where
a - a
Maip ---- (5.20)
4 Ca 7 --F |

is the mutual inductance between contours C; and C> and is Neumann's formula

bat f dt - di
4m C2/4C2 |F¥ - 7"

is the self-inductance for contour Cz. Note that the only difference between self- and

for mutual inductance, and

mutual inductance is in the contours of integration: for self-inductance, integration
is over the same contour while for mutual inductance, integration is over both

contours.

[PAGE 198]
184 Inductance Chapter 5

Circuits
Applying the definition of voltage from (5.4) to (5.19) provides a result completely

in circuit quantities as

di; dig
= ---- + Lo--, 5.21
V2 M-- + Lo at ( )

where ve is the voltage on the closed contour, Co. Note that if the roles of the
contours C and C2 are reversed, then the formula for mutual inductance in (5.20)
remains unchanged. Therefore, inductance is reciprocal. The voltage-current rela-

tionship for the reversed case is

dio di,
a) pa 5.22
v= Met Lie (5.22)

Equations (5.21) and (5.22) can be recast into matrix form as

v i, M diy
on dey (5.23)
v2 M Ls a.
Generalizing this result for any number of contours yields
57% (5.24)
v=L_. ,

where F is the inductance matrix. Since mutual inductance is reciprocal, then the

inductance matrix is symmetric with L,; = Lyi.

Loops vs. Wire

As in section 5.2, it is important to carefully note the origin of the self- and mutual
inductance. It is the closed contours and not the wires that have inductance. The
self-inductance relates the voltage produced on a closed loop to the magnetic flux
generated by current on that same loop. The mutual inductance relates the voltage
produced on a closed loop to the magnetic flux generated by current on another

loop.

[PAGE 199]
185

Section 5.3. Definition of Mutual Inductance

5.3.2 Field-Based Definition

Avoiding the thin-wire approximation, a more general formula for inductance can

be found by equating the right-hand side of (5.21) to the negative of the right-hand
side of (5.16) to obtain

wat 2 = B,-d -- Bo -ds. 0.20
My + Laz a} J, 8 sto ee (5.25)

Integrating with a zero constant of integration yields

Mi, + Loi =/f By a+ | [ By - ds. (5.26)
Se S23

from which it is apparent that
M-= =| B, -ds. (5.27)
"1 Se

Mutual inductance is given by the flux generated by the current in loop 1 that is
coupled into loop 2, then normalized by the current in loop 1. In other words, it is the
flux linked into loop 2 that is the root cause of mutual inductance. For this reason,
mutual inductance is often described as a flux linkage. Using this terminology, then

self-inductance is caused by flux linkage from a loop to itself.

5.3.3. Energy-Based Definition

For many calculations, especially computer-based general-purpose simulators. an
energy-based formulation for mutual inductance is simpler to implement and execute through the replacement of line and surface integrals with volume integrals.
Equating the energy stored using circuit variables,
E= 9 Miatite
1

= Matai, (5.28)

1 --
c= 5//[ Bi. -Thav
2 V
1 --
= s/f Bo - Hy dv, (5.29)
V

yields a general field-based formula for mutual inductance:

to that using field variables,

[PAGE 200]
186 Inductance Chapter 5

May = Mo
J

_ | ff Ba Faav
dito Vv

_ aI Bo - Adv. (5.30)
2172 Vv

The subscripts on the field quantities B and H imply the use of superposition. If
both loops are simultaneously driven with current, then just one set of B and H
exist. Using superposition, loop 1 is driven to produce B, and H, while the source
on loop 2 is open-circuited (22 = 0). These fields are stored and the process repeated
with i; = 0 to obtain By and Ho. These two solutions, picking either By and H
or Bz and Hj, are used in (5.30) to find the mutual inductance. Note that B, and
Hy, alone determine the inductance of loop 1 according to (5.15), while By and
Hy» determine the inductance of loop 2. The extension to any number of loops is

accomplished with a straightforward exercise in index manipulation.

5.3.4 Sign

However the mutual inductance is computed, its sign depends on the directions
of the current flow. If the direction of one current is reversed, then the computed
mutual inductance magnitude is unchanged but the sign flips. The user of a mutual

inductance must be careful to set the sign properly.

5.4 Calculations with Neumann's Formula

While Neumann's formula is an outstanding vehicle for discussions on inductance,
its direct use in computations is limited. The double integration requires that the
positions in the denominator be colocated, causing the denominator to vanish and
the integral to become undefined. The source of the difficulty is that, in contrast to
real wires, the contour has zero cross-sectional area. Fortunately, it is possible to
incorporate finite wire radius through a mutual inductance calculation.

To accommodate finite wire radius using Neumann's formula, the inductance of

a loop is subdivided into two components: internal inductance, for the inductance

[PAGE 201]
187

Section 5.4. Calculations with Neumann's Formula

)

wire diameter

Figure 5.7. Concentric closed contours for computing external inductance using

Neumann's formula for mutual inductance.

of the loop due to magnetic flux inside the wire; and external inductance, for the
inductance of the loop due to magnetic flux outside the wire but still passing through
the closed contour. The inductance is then just the sum of these two components.
Consider a thick, round wire formed into a circular loop. In Figure 5.7, a section
of this loop is shown along with two thin wires located at the center of the thick
wire (C') and along the inner edge (C). The important observation is that the
external inductance of the thick wire is determined by the flux inside CO , while the
mutual inductance between loops C' and C is also determined by this flux (the flux
linkage). Therefore, the external inductance of the thick wire can be computed as the
mutual inductance between the thin wires. Neumann's formula for self-inductance
is avoided. Note that the problem is not complete until the internal inductance is

added.

5.4.1 Calculation of External Inductance for Loops of Thin Wires

The calculation of externa] inductance for thin wires is examined in this section by

way of example, continuing the discussion on the inductance of a round loop of wire.

[PAGE 202]
188 Inductance Chapter 5

To find the external inductance of the loop through the calculation of the mutual

inductance between C and C' in Figure 5.7, let

'

= bcosd é+bsind 7

|

rF = acosd# + asin dy

dé = bdé (--sin@ @ + cos6 ¥)

=
T

a d6(-- sin 0% + cos 09) (5.31)
then

\jrF--F | |(acos @ -- bcos 6 )# + (asiné -- bsind )4|

= 1/a° + b? -- 2ab(cos6 cos' + sin @sing' )

= 1/a? + 0? -- 2abcos(d -- 6')

aw a

abcos(6 -- 6) dé' dé. (5.32)

Filling out Neumann's formula for mutual inductance in (5.20), then

2 2a
™ b o
= Pr os(O= 8) pag'. (5.33)
Am Jo Jo fa? +h? -- 2abcos(6 -- 6')
From symmetry, set 6 = 0 and evaluate the integral over C by multiplying by 27.
Convert the integral on C' to the range 0 to 7, then

" bcos
Mat
pa [ cos 6
1--2(2) cos@' + (2)?
= la (8)#(3). 6.0

where K and F are the complete elliptic functions of the first and second kind,

respectively, and the integral formula used is

" COs xr 2

z= -[|K --E 2
0 la dpeosa ape pi) - ZO), p< 1, (5.35)

[PAGE 203]
189

Section 5.4. Calculations with Neumann's Formula

where

= dz .
K(k) = [ -- (5.36)
(h) 0 1 -- k? sin? x
and

E(k) = | ° V1 --k? sin? zdz. (5.37)
0

For thin wires, a/b ~ 1, so K and E can be approximated as

K(k) ~ In (a=) (5.38)

and
E(k) ~ 1. (5.39)

Let the wire radius be defined as r = b -- a, then

V-G) V5 -Q'a VF a0

since (2)? is negligible compared to a when r < b, Substituting (5.38), (5.39),
and (5.40) into (5.34) yields a simplified formula for the external inductance of the

round loop of thin wire:

Lexternal = M = pb in ( ~) ~ | (5.41)

T
5.4.2 Calculation of Internal Inductance for Round Wires
For internal inductance calculations, the thin-wire approximation does not apply,
so Neumann's formula is inappropriate. Inductance must be calculated with a field-

based formulation such as (5.15). For round wires under quasi-static conditions,

Ampere's law in integral form,

pua-{[7a+ [faa (5.42)
C s dt J Js

can be used to find the magnetic fields inside the wire.

The cross section of a round wire is shown in Figure 5.8. Noting that dé = rddd,

[PAGE 204]
190 Inductance Chapter 5

round wire \

Figure 5.8. Cross section of a round wire with annotation for finding the magnetic

fields inside the wire.

then H - dé = H,(r)rd@, where H has no dependence on ¢ due to symmetry. The
current density is J = i/(ma?)s. Neglecting the time-derivative for the quasi-static

solution, then (5.42) can be evaluated as

LMM [[F%

" Halr)rdé = [; nada

27 r
Ho(r)r | de = za f xrdxr
z
H4(r) = Onan
With the constitutive relationship for magnetic fields, B = 4H, then the mag-

netic flux density inside the wire is
jt
Bg(r) = r.
(7) 27a?
Using this expression in (5.15) and integrating over the volume of the wire yields

£ Sf wi i
Linternal = aff GS r) Ca) 2ur dr, (5.44)

where the integrations over the length, £, and the angular variations are already

(5.43)

incorporated. Completing the computation yields

pe
Lin ernal = 37; .
ternal = -- (5.45)

[PAGE 205]
191

Section 5.4. Calculations with Neumann's Formula

which provides the internal inductance of a straight round wire in isolation. Note
that the value does not depend on the radius of the wire; all round wires of a given
length have the same internal inductance.

Continuing the example of inductance calculation for the round loop of thin
round wire, the inductance of the loop is the sum of the internal and external

inductances. Adding (5.41) and (5.45) with @ = 27b provides
8b
L= pb in (=) _ 7/4] . (5.46)
r

5.4.3 Frequency Dependence of Inductance

The fields external to a wire are weakly affected by the distribution of the current
inside of the wire, so external inductance changes little with frequency while the
quasi-static approximation holds. On the other hand, internal inductance is strongly
affected by the current distribution. When the skin effect is well developed, the current resides on the surface of the wire and the internal inductance tends towards
zero. Therefore, the low-frequency inductance of a loop of wire is the sum of the internal and external inductances, while at high frequencies with well-developed skin
effects (but the quasi-static assumption must still hold), the inductance is just the
external inductance because the internal inductance vanishes. The frequency dependence of inductance follows the trend sketched in Figure 5.9. For wires made from
nonmagnetic materials, the low- and high-frequency limits typically differ by a few
percent. Except for the breakdown of the quasi-static assumption, these trends are
observable in chapter 7, Figure 7. 7, where the inductance of a coaxial transmission
line is computed with a PEEC method (see chapter 7, section 7.3).

Magnetic materials, such as Alloy 42, can generate very high internal inductance
due to high relative permeability. The resulting high inductance does not necessarily lead to poor circuit performance. While magnetic materials can push up the
internal inductance by orders of magnitude, skin effects shield the material at high
frequencies. Since the effect of an inductor in a circuit is governed by its reactance,
high inductance at low frequencies can still result in low reactance and minimal

circuit effect.

[PAGE 206]
Inductance Chapter 5

192

Low-Frequency Quasi-Static

% Limit Assumption
Sexe Line Breakdown
3

3

2 Lent

S High-Frequency

Limit

Frequency

Figure 5.9. Frequency dependence of inductance.

5.5 Definition of Partial Inductance

Prior sections have established that self-inductance and mutual inductance are defined by loops of wire and not by the wires themselves (for thin wires). Although
measurements must always be performed on closed loops--otherwise, no current
flows and there is nothing to measure--calculations can be performed on pieces
of closed loops. Calculation of the contributions to inductance from subsections of
closed loops leads to the concept. of partial inductance.

For thin wires, the inductance of a loop is given by (5.9), which is computed
on a closed contour. This closed contour can be broken into any number of open

contours, as suggested in Figure 5.3, then
a . dé
L=
af Xf. jF-F| --F |

elias)

Noting the similarity of the bracketed portion to the definitions of inductance in

(5.9) and mutual inductance in (5.20), the partial self-inductance is defined as

eel Lee

and the partial mutual inductance as

[PAGE 207]
Section 5.6. Formulas for Partial Self- and Mutual Inductance 193

M, -#| | dé de (5.47)
J 4r Cy Cy lF ~F |

A loop can have any number of partial self-inductances and partial mutual induc-

tances, depending on how many sections into which the loop is broken. The number
and configuration of pieces are selected for convenience in the solution of the prob-
Jem at hand.

Calculations using partial self- and mutual inductances must carefully include
all of the pieces needed to form a closed loop. Every piece of the loop has partial selfinductance plus partial mutual inductance to every other piece. Each contribution
must be computed so that the sum for the entire closed loop produces the correct
inductance according to (5.9).

The generalization of partial inductance to the mutual inductance between two
loops is straightforward. Every piece of each loop has partial self-inductance plus
partial mutual inductance to every other piece in all the loops, so several loops are
treated in exactly the same manner as just one.

It is important to recognize that partial self- and mutual inductances are not
physical quantities. As mathematical constructs, they cannot be measured, Certainly they should be used when convenient, but the focus should always remain
with closed loops, the inductance of closed loops, and the mutual inductance be-

tween closed loops.

5.6 Formulas for Partial Self- and Mutual Inductance

Partial inductances are convenient when the geometry of the closed contour can be
segmented into pieces for which formulas are already available. Using the thin-wire
approximation and Neumann's formula, formulas for many useful structures can be
derived. The following sections provide a few of these plus discussion on their use,

while the Exercises section provides a few more results.

[PAGE 208]
194 Inductance Chapter 5

5.6.1 Partial Mutua! Inductance between Two Parallel Wires

For two parallel straight wires, the setup for the partial mutual inductance calcula-

tion is shown in Figure 5.10. For use in (5.47), the various vectors are

T= rT
Fo= rétag
ir --F) = V(a' --- 2)? +a?
dé = dzé
dé = dr 2, (5.48)
then the partial mutual inductance is
b pb ,
d
M, = reall | xdzx
An Jo Jo V(x' -- 2)? + a?
2
pb b b a\2 a
-Bis(Seye@))-veGeg].
On In wt +(4) 1+ 5 +3 ; (5.49)

where the subscript p is used to emphasize that this is a partial mutual inductance.

Two integral formulas useful in this solution are

du
--==_=_=_ = 2 2
/ soa =k (u +Vurta ) (5.50)

Figure 5.10. Setup for partial mutual inductance calculation for two parallel thin

wires.

[PAGE 209]
Section 5.6. Formulas for Partial Self- and Mutual Inductance 195

and
jo (u + fu? t+ a?) du =uln (u + Yfue+ a? | -- Vu? +a?. (5.51)
For narrowly spaced wires with b >> a, (5.49) can be approximated as
b 2b
My = fin (2) ~ a]. (5.52)
27 a
The directions of the integrations imply that the current flow on both wires is
in the same direction, so if the currents are actually moving in opposite directions,

such as when one wire is acting as the return for another, then the sign of the partial

mutual inductance must be reversed.

5.6.2 Partial Self-Inductance for a Round Wire

As discussed. in section 5.4, Neumann's formula cannot be used to compute partial
self-inductance. Instead, the partial self-inductance is found by computing the partial mutual inductance between a thin wire at the center of the (fat) round wire
and one along its edge.

As shown in Figure 5.11, the flux linkage for the round wire is the same as for the
two parallel thin wires, so (5.49) or (5.52) can be used to find the external partial
self-inductance.

Since the self-flux linkage extends laterally to infinity, that is where the return
currents are assumed to be. A realistic circuit will require a return path at a finite
distance, and the return path's partial self-inductance along with all partial mutual
inductances must be computed. The partial self-inductance formula derived in this
way is said to return at infinity.

To the external partial self-inductance, the internal partial self-inductance from

(5.45) must be added. For long thin wires with 6 >> a, adding the internal to the

n (2) 3], (5.53)

external partial self-inductance yields

[PAGE 210]
196 Inductance Chapter 5

Area for Self-Flux Linkage

(a)

Area for Mutual Flux Linkage

(b)

Figure 5.11. The flux linkage in (a) to find a partial self-inductance for a round

wire is identical to that in (b) for the partial mutual inductance between two thin

wires.

[PAGE 211]
197

Section 5.6. Formulas for Partial Self- and Mutual Inductance

Figure 5.12. Setup for partial mutual inductance calculation for two colinear thin

wires.

5.6.3 Partial Mutual Inductance of Two Colinear Wires

For two colinear thin wires, the setup in Figure 5.12 can be used to find the partial
mutual inductance between the wires. The setup is simple. and Neumann's formula

for this case is

u, - # [ ° da'dx
0

Ar a -2£
= £ [-alna + bind -- (b~ a)In(b ~a)). (5.54)
T

5.6.4 Assembling Solutions

The use of partial inductance to solve inductance problems requires four steps.
1. Break the closed loop into several sections.
2. Compute the partial self-inductance for each section.

3. Compute the partial mutual inductance between each pair of sections.

i

. Assemble all results into a circuit simulation.

Since partial inductance is a mathematical construction, failure to completely apply

the method can result in nonphysical results.

[PAGE 212]
198 Inductance Chapter 5

As an example, consider a transmission line constructed from two parallel thin
wires. Assume that, the line length, b, is long compared to the wire spacing, S, and
that the wire radii are a; and ag. The inductance of the complete circuit (neglecting

end effects) with one wire as signal and the other as return is

L = Ly + Lpp -- 2M,

_ bf, (2) 3
On in (2) 4

|
tml) a

Examination of (5.53) reveals that the partial inductance is a nonlinear function
of length with a bln b dependence. The transmission line result in (5.55) is linearly
dependent on the length of the line, so once the nonphysical partial inductances are
correctly assembled into an inductance, the familiar per-unit-length dependence is
recovered. Note that (5.55) is strongly dependent on length and weakly dependent
on wire spacing and wire diameter. To reduce inductance, it is much more important
to reduce interconnect length first, then reduce spacing or increase radius.

As another example, consider a simple computation regarding the partial selfinductance of a round wire. The partial self-inductance of a round wire 1cm long
with a radius of 0.1mm from (5.53) is 9.097nH. The partial self-inductance of a
wire half as long is 3.855nH. Note that 9.097 # 2x 3.855. To correctly find the
partial self-inductance of the long wire from two short wires, the partial mutual
inductance between the two short wires must be included. From (5.54), the partial
mutual inductance is 0.6931nH. The partial self-inductance of the long wire using
the short wire results is 3.855 + 3.855 +2 x 0.6931 = 9.096 nH, which is the same

as that obtained for the long wire computed in one piece.

[PAGE 213]
Section 5.7. Circuit Symbois 199

5.7 Circuit Symbols

The inductor circuit symboi represents both inductance and partial inductance in
schematics, where the number of inductors present in each loop determines the type
of inductance represented. Since a loop has just one inductance associated with it,
if one inductor appears in the schematic of that loop, then the inductor represents
the inductance. Otherwise, more than one inductor appears in the loop and the
inductors represent partial inductances.

The distinction only matters in helping to ensure that mutual inductances are
appropriately included. For inductance, mutual inductance is required only between
loops, while for partial inductance, partial mutual inductance is required between
each partial self-inductance, whether in the same loop or not.

The use of the inductor symbol for either inductance or partial inductance is
shown in Figure 5.13. The inductors are shown polarized with the "o" to indicate
where the mutual inductance formula assumes that the current enters. The polarity
of one can be reversed if the sign of the mutual inductance is also reversed. Errors
in polarity and/or mutual inductance sign can result in an active circuit due to
violation of Lenz's law.

Depending on the circuit simulator, the mutual inductance may be entered directly in units of Henry or indirectly as a unitless value. SPICE uses the "k-factor"

for mutual inductance calculated as

Figure 5.13. Demonstration of the use of the inductor symbol and mutual induc-

tance.

[PAGE 214]
200 Inductance Chapter 5

,__M
© VEL

and k is bounded between +1. K-factors are convenient in that they indicate the

strength of the mutual inductance, with magnitudes below about 0.1 being weak
and above about 0.4 being strong. Note that unless a k-factor is very small, deleting
a mutual inductance can lead to an active circuit when many loops are involved.
Much of circuit simulation is set up and run from schematic capture programs.
However, many schematic capture programs, including top-of-the-line software from
major vendors, do not accommodate mutual inductance on-screen in the same manner as other basic circuit components. It is important to recognize that this omission is due the difficulty of cleanly implementing mutual inductance in graphical
schematic capture programs and not due to a lack of need for this basic circuit element. Work-arounds must be implemented in these cases so that mutual inductance

can be included.

5.8 Modal Decomposition

Just as Fourier decomposition often leads to insight for time-varying signals by
providing the frequency spectrum, general matrices can also be decomposed into
constituent parts for further study. In general, an N x N matrix can be decomposed
into N vectors, called eigenvectors, that are each weighted by a constant, called an
ewgenvalue. A primary property of interest is that eigenvectors, like the sinusoids
of Fourier analysis, are orthogonal. Such modal decomposition enables extended
analysis and study of matrices.

Inductance matrices are symmetric, due to reciprocity, real and square. For
matrices with these properties, an extensive theoretical framework exists that can
be directly used to develop a modal decomposition for inductance matrices. The
modal decomposition enables the inductance matrix to be diagonalized, where all
matrix values off of the diagonal are zero. Physically, the mutual inductances are
eliminated. Once diagonalized, issues in simulation and passivity can be readily

explored.

[PAGE 215]
201

Section 5.8. Modal Decomposition

5.8.1 Diagonalization

The eigenvectors, i,, and eigenvalues, Ay, of a square N x N real symmetric matrix,

T, are determined from the solution of the equation

Lig = ale, &~=1,2,....N. (5.56)

All of the eigenvectors are linearly independent. If all of the eigenvalues are distinct,
such as when the physical structure described by Z has no symmetry, then the
eigenvectors are also orthogonal. In any case, the eigenvectors can be orthogonalized
and normalized through the application of the Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization
process.*

With orthonormal eigenvectors, an N x N matrix can be formed as

T= 4) tg + in |
t1, 22, wee iN,
iy, in, +++ in,
= (5.57)
ty lon see tNy
T is an orthogonal matrix with the useful property that
== =
TT =U, (5.58)

where U is the identity matrix and the superscript 7 denotes the matrix transpose.

Using the orthogonality property of eigenvectors (im-in =0,m #7), T diagonalizes

Las
A 0 0
at== | 0 %»- 0
TLT=| (5.59)
0 0 Aw

eee
3. See for example, C. R. Wylie, Jr. Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 3rd ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1966, p. 458,

[PAGE 216]
202 inductance Chapter 5

With (5.58), (5.59) can be recast as

Ay (OO 0
_-- --_-- 0 A2 0 =T
L=T| -
id
_ Fi', (5.60)

which shows that ZL can be diagonalized into its eigenvalues by pre- and post-
= =T
multiplication by T and T . The benefit of diagonalization appears when (5.60) is

folded into circuit analyses.

5.8.2 Circuit Theory

The voltage drop across an inductance matrix is related to the current by (5.24),

repeated here as

Substituting the diagonalized form of the inductance matrix from (5.60) yields
T di

= (5.61)

= = =T
Since L is not time-varying, then neither is T. Moving T under the time derivative
and using (5.58) yields

=T =d =T_
T 0=A<(T 3). (5.62)

Modal voltages and currents can be defined as

im = T i, (5.63)

then the modal voltages are related to the modal currents by

_ =dim,

[PAGE 217]
Section 5.8. Modal Decomposition 203

Since \ isa diagonal matrix, (5.64) represents a decoupled set of N equations that
can be solved independently. In contrast. (5.24) represents N coupled equations.
Direct solution of (5.24) involves the full and dense TZ matrix with N(N + 1)/2
terms. Solution of (5.64) involves just N terms. So a tradeoff exists: direct solution
with many terms, or indirect solution with few terms but with pre and postprocess-

ing required to transform into and out of the modal voltages and currents.

5.8.3 Manual Implementation

Inductance matrices can be incorporated into circuit simulation in terms of modal
voltages and currents through auxiliary circuits set up within the simulation. The

original circuit is shown in Figure 5.14, where the voltage-current relationship is

= dt
wo -pRaT 7 (5.65)

oo

The eigenvectors of L are computed, orthonormalized, and then assembled into 7
according to (5.57). The eigenvalues are computed and stored.

At each time step of the simulation, the modal voltages are computed as

=--T
Im =T (oY -- GR)

Figure 5.14. Voltage and current setup for an inductance matrix. For clarity, the

mutual inductances are not shown.

[PAGE 218]
204 Inductance Chapter 5

and are used to drive N decoupled circuits that compute the modal currents from
the modal voltages using (5.64). The circuits are shown in Figure 5.15, where the
eigenvalues are the modal inductors. The modal currents are used to reconstruct

the currents in the original circuit according to

Bell

i=

dm:

The modal currents drive the circuit in Figure 5.16, which replaces the original
circuit in Figure 5.14. The circuit simulator then steps from one time step to the
next, solving the N auxiliary circuits along with any others present.

Direct implementation of the inductance matrix requires a circuit simulation
with N? circuit elements. A manual implementation of a modal decomposition requires N(2.N + 1) circuit elements, so simulation is slower with the modal decomposition. However, if the modal decomposition is hard-coded into the simulator, the
number of circuit elements drops to 3N for a significant time savings. Note that the
eigenvalue problem solution represents a small time penalty since it is solved just

once when setting up a modal decomposition.

5.8.4 Passivity

The modal framework enables a direct investigation of the passivity of inductance
matrices. It is important to check if an inductance matrix is passive because it is
remarkably easy to generate one that is not. Active inductance matrices can cause
nonconvergence of the circuit simulation, with computation of ever-growing voltage levels, and most dangerously, reasonable but incorrect results. A dense matrix
completely filled out through a consistent electromagnetic simulation or measurement is not likely to be active; however, matrices constructed from partial results
or by combinations of results generated from several techniques can easily be active. Numerical errors can cause an electromagnetic simulation to produce an active
matrix.

The instantaneous power delivered to an inductance matrix is

p(t) =i (t)0(t).

[PAGE 219]
Soe

Tv vey Tigu- ve) Tyy(vh vey
Tvl vRy Typ vey Typ VAN

h hy ee] hy
Ih i vi fi T(t W) Ty ; " yi

Figure 5.15, Auxiliary circuit setups for calculation of the modal currents from the modal voltages,

[PAGE 220]
Inductance Chapter 5

206

Figure 5.16. Replacement circuit for the original inductance matrix in Figure 5,14.

Substituting (5.24) to eliminate the voltage, then

_ =T,,.=di(t)
p(t) =i ()L----.

The inductance matrix can be substituted with (5.60) to obtain

T di(t)
dt --

p(t) =i

(t)T AT (5.66)

Modal currents can be introduced using (5.63) to simplify the expression to

p(t) = F(x,

[PAGE 221]
Section 5.8. Modal Decomposition 207

Since 1 is diagonal, then the power simplifies to

>> Neteng ( 1) Sm) (5.67)

The total power is the sum of the powers in each mode.
For the inductance matrix to be passive, the total power delivered to the matrix

from the start of time must be positive at any given time. Mathematically, this

requirement is stated as
t
E(t) -| p(r)dr > 0 V t.

Integrating (5.67) yields

E(t) = [ 3 Meng (7) imal) Sonal dar

© k=1
Interchanging the integral and summation, and assuming the currents are initially

zero, then integration yields

Note that 72, (t) > 0 always, so for E(t) > 0 for any arbitrary time, in general
Mg >OVE

is required. Therefore, the inductance matrix is passive only when all of its eigenvalues are greater than or equal to zero. However, a zero eigenvalue represents a
shorted modal voltage, so in practice, positive eigenvalues are required.*

After an inductance matrix has been obtained from any source, it is good practice
to compute its eigenvalues and confirm that all are positive. The appearance of any
negative or zero eigenvalues disqualifies the matrix from use and indicates a problem
in the methodology used to construct it.

4. The inductance matrix is Hermitian since it is real and symmetric. If all of its eigenvalues are

greater than zero, then the matrix is positive definite.

[PAGE 222]
208 Inductance Chapter 5

5.9 Nonuniqueness of Partial Inductance

Section 5.5 shows that the inductance of a loop can be partitioned into N segments with N partial self-inductances and N(N -- 1)/2 partial mutual inductances
between them. The only physical quantity is the inductance of the loop, so the
partial inductances only have utility once they are combined to form a closed loop.
Since the number of variables exceeds the number of constraints, partial inductance
represents an under-determined system, and an infinite number of solutions exist.
As an example, consider the two partial self-inductors with the partial mutual
inductor shown in Figure 5.17.If the ends are closed off to form a loop, then the

inductance of the loop is
L=I1,+L2,---2M.

Note that if any value is added to all three partial inductances, then the inductance
of the loop is unchanged, so partial inductance is at least nonunique to within an
additive constant.

The nonuniqueness of partial inductance can be shown mathematically to stem
from the lack of a closed loop. Inductance is defined using the magnetic vector

potential as

L= foA dt

(5.68)

which is repeated here from section 5.2.2 for convenience. The loop can be subdi-

vided as shown in Figure 5.3 to obtain

Figure 5.17. Two partial self-inductances and a partial mutual inductance.

[PAGE 223]
209

Section 5.9. Nonuniqueness of Partial Inductance

N --_ --
_ k=l to, A-dé

L
Then the partial inductance of section k is
te, A ; dé

t

Le = (5.69)

Since A is defined by B = V x A, A can have the gradient of a scalar field super-

imposed onto it without changing B, then
B= Vx(A+V¢)

VxA+V x Vo
=VxA, (5.70)

where V x V@ = 0 by vector identity. While B remains unchanged, L,; does not.
and
to (A+ Vo) d
i
So, A- dé n to, Vo: de

v t

Ly =
(5.71)

Since ¢ is arbitrary, then L;, is not unique. Uniqueness is restored when the loop is
closed since ¢ V@- dé = 0 by vector identity.

While the magnetic flux density is not perturbed by the superposition of the
gradient of a scalar field, the electric field strength is modified according to (5.2):

OF OE (5.72)
However, for quasi-static analysis, the time-varying terms are neglected and F remains unchanged.

In summary, while inductance is unique, partial inductance can easily be shown
to be not unique. The nonuniqueness is of no consequence since when combined, the
partial inductances produce a unique inductance. The key to successful application
of partial inductances is to ensure that they are only used in complete and closed

loops.

[PAGE 224]
210 Inductance Chapter 5

5.10 Open Loop Modeling

To compute or measure inductance, closed loops are required. However, interconnect
modeling requires open loops so that circuits can be connected. The case of a single
loop is shown in Figure 5.18. Breaking the loop creates a two-wire interconnect,
but the loop still has only one inductance describing it. The full inductance can
be assigned to the top wire or the bottom wire, or it can be split between the two

with a mutual inductance. The assignment is arbitrary, nonunique, and totally at

Loop with Inductance L
Closed Breaks Interconnect
Loop for
Connections
(a)

Equivalent Interconnect Models
L L

L L>
L=L t+ L> -2M
(b) (c) (d)

Figure 5.18. Interconnects require the opening of the closed loop to make connections. (a) The loop is broken in two places to create two ports, resulting in a
two-wire interconnect. (b) The inductance is assigned to the top wire. (c) The inductance is assigned to the bottom wire. (d) The inductance is split between both

wires.

[PAGE 225]
Section 5.10. Open Loop Modeling 211

the modeler's convenience; the only requiremerit is that the closed loop must have
the proper inductance.

In Figure 5.18b and Figure 5.18c, one of the wires has no assigned inductance.
This lead is often referred to as perfect or as the reference lead. The lead with the
assigned inductance is then referenced to the reference lead. This terminology has
little use since the assignments are arbitrary. It is important to remember that wires
do not have inductance--closed loops have inductance.

For two loops, the interconnect is constructed as shown in F igure 5.19. Each
loop generates a reference lead, but since the reference leads have no inductance
and are always grounded, they can be combined into one reference lead, as shown
in the final circuit model. Greater numbers of loops are handled in the same way.

Very often, the loops will share a common return path as shown for two loops
in Figure 5.20. The return path is often a ground or power plane. The common
leg increases the mutual inductance between the two loops, and this fact will be
represented in the circuit model. Assuming that the inductances are assigned to the
wires connecting points ac and bd, then the ground plane becomes the reference
lead. The fact that the ground plane has no assigned inductance in the circuit model
does not mean that planes have low inductance---loops have inductance; wires (even
fat ones, like planes) do not.

The number of inductors and mutual inductors in the circuit model varies depending on whether a reference lead is included in the circuit model. If a reference
lead is included, then N loops lead to N inductors and N(N -- 1)/2 mutual inductors. 'The component values are equal to the actual loop inductances and the mutual
inductances between them. If a reference lead is not included, then the N loops lead
to N +1 inductors and N(N + 1)/2 mutual inductors, and the component values
are arbitrary as long as the loop inductances and mutual inductances between loops

of the circuit match the actual measurement or simulation of the real structure.

[PAGE 226]
212 Inductance

M
ty tI Breaks for Connections

Interconnect

ofVvyy" Same Model Redrawn

Chapter 5

Figure 5.19. Example interconnect model for two closed loops. The loop induc-

tances are assigned to the top wire for both loops.

[PAGE 227]
213

Section 5.11. Manipulating the Reference Lead

Figure 5.20. Two wire loops using a common leg serving as a return path.

Common Ground

A significant advantage of models with a reference lead is that circuits on both
sides of the interconnect can utilize a common ground connection. For example,
in Figure 5.21, the identical circuit is implemented in (a) and (b), except an extra
ground is located in (b) on the other (driver) side of the interconnect. 'The connection
through common ground shorts out the partial inductance of the ground connection
in the interconnect. In (c), the interconnect model utilizes a reference lead that is
conveniently chosen so that the ground lead has no assigned inductance. Therefore,

common ground can be placed on both sides of the interconnect.

5.11 Manipulating the Reference Lead

It is very common for circuit simulations to be set up with multiple global grounds.
In SPICE, nodes 0 and gnd are automatically global. To avoid shorting out the partial inductance of the ground connection in interconnect models (as in Figure 5.21b),
the models should reference the ground lead (as in Figure 5.21c). Some methods and
programs produce interconnect models without reference leads, so in these cases the
model needs to be manipulated to create a reference lead.

Consider an N-lead interconnect with a common return path. If inductance is
assigned to all N-leads plus the common return, then the interconnect is charac-

terized by an (N +1) x (N +1) matrix, and the model is shown in Figure 5.22.

[PAGE 228]
214 Inductance Chapter 5

(c) Correct

Figure 5.21. Use of global grounds can be affected by the interconnect modeling
scheme.

[PAGE 229]
Section 5.11. Manipulating the Reference Lead 215

L,
q O R

L
L 2 _o/VWV\__o wr
vb ool v8

L
IN+Ig N+1
L olNHoyVVA__o ur
Viel Vv

N+1

Figure 5.22. Schematic for an N-lead interconnect with common return path and
no reference lead.
Solving the circuit, Kirchhoff's voltage law requires
Vi--Vr=(R+juL)I, (5.73)
where the series resistance of each conductor is included for completeness; Vz, Vz

and J are vectors of length N +1; and, R and F are (N +1) x (N +1) matrices.

Since all current passes through the interconnect, Kirchhoff's current law requires

N
h=- Sh. (5.74)
k=1
ki
Substituting (5.74) into (5.73) yields
Vi-Ve=(R+juL)PI,, (5.75)
where /,=[ I, --- Ty Tiga +++ Ina, J? and Pis an (N+ 1) x N matrix

constructed from an N x N identity matrix with ~1 inserted at each column in row

2. For example, for four conductors with no reference lead,

1 oO 0

= Oo 1 0
P=

~1 -1 -1l

0 0 1

[PAGE 230]
216 Inductance Chapter 5

The reference potential can be moved to lead i by subtracting its potential from
those of the other leads. This operation can be performed by multiplying through

--T
(5.75) by P , yielding

= = =T=-- = _ === _
PV_---P Vr=P RPI, +juP LPI, (5.76)
Equation (5.76) suggests the definitions
--' =T =
R =P RP
= =T=--
L=PLP
-- =T
V,=PVr
--' =T_
Ve=P Vr. (5.77)

Both R and A are N x N matrices, while V, and Va are vectors with length NV.
The original voltage-current relationship in (5.73) is preserved with the reference
potential set or moved to conductor i. With the voltage-current relationship unchanged, the new primed interconnect based on (5.77) produces exactly the same
terminal characteristics as the original interconnect in (5.73).

Using (5.77), the inductance and resistance matrices of any interconnect of the
form in Figure 5.22 can be manipulated to create a reference lead on any of the
N +1 leads. If no reference is present, it can be created. If one is already present,
it can be moved.

An interesting application for rereferencing of interconnect models is in com paring measurements and/or simulations from different sources. Different setups can
produce different models because of the way the return path is set up. Models will
normally be referenced to the return path, making comparison between two results
difficult. If the models are rereferenced to one of the leads, the results can then be
directly compared, except for the values which are known to be different for the return path. This technique is basically a way to set up the loops in a similar fashion

so that the two models can be fairly compared.

[PAGE 231]
Section 5.11. Maniputating the Reference Lead 217

Example with No Reference

An interconnect. constructed using four identical wires is described by a partial

inductance matrix given by

= 6 10 6 4
Lh=
4 6 1 6
3. 4 6 10

I 0 0

-- 0 1 0
P=

0 0 1

-l -l -1

is used in (5.77) to construct the equivalent 3 x 3 inductance matrix

144 9 5
L=!] 9 12 6
5 6 8

é

with lead 4 as reference. The matrices F and can be used interchangeably, keeping
in mind that all connections must pass through L, while Eis referenced to lead 4,
which does support current. flow.

Hand calculations can verify the equivalence of the matrices. The only consideration is that all loops through the interconnect. must provide the same inductance.
Consider the loop out through lead 1 and back through lead 3. From TL, the loop inductance is 10+10---2%4 = 12, while for Z. the result is 14+8--2«5 -- 12, the same
answer. For the loop out lead 3 and back on lead 4, the results are 10+10--2%6 =8
and 8 (read straight from the matrix since lead 4 has no partial inductance), so again

the results are the same. Every closed loop will also yield identical closed loop in-

ductances.

[PAGE 232]
218 Inductance Chapter 5

Example with Reference

An interconnect constructed using four identical wires referenced to a common

return path is described by a partial inductance matrix given by

10 6 4 3

=_ 6 10 6 4
L=

4 6 10 6

3 4, 6 10

The common return path represents a fifth lead with no partial inductance. To move

the reference to another lead, the fifth lead must be added to the matrix, yielding

10 6 4 3 0
6 10 6 4 0
L=!| 4 6 10 6 0
3 4 6 10 0
0 0 0 0 90
To reference the matrix to lead 2, use
1 0 90 90
~-l -1l -1 -1
P=| 0 1 09 0
0 0 1 0
0 0 1
to obtain
8 2 3 4
a _ 28 6 4
3 6 12 6
44 6 10

Note that this 4 x 4 matrix represents leads 1, 3, 4, and 5 (the former reference),
and now lead 2 is the reference. For example, the inductance of the loop out lead 1

and back lead 3 is 10+10-2*4=12 and 8+8--2«2=12

[PAGE 233]
Section 5.12. Model Reduction 219

5.12 Model Reduction

Using the algorithms in chapter 4, section 4.5, partial inductance matrices can be
reduced in size to incorporate known information. The principal cases are when
mode} leads are open-circuited, short-circuited, and paralleled together.

If a lead is open-circuited, then no current flows through the lead, and it does
not affect the circuit. If a lead is shorted to ground on both ends, a loop is formed
that can support the flow of current. While no voltage source directly drives a
current in the loop, the mutual inductances linking it to other driven circuits will
generate current flow, called eddy currents, which affect the operation of the circuit
by reducing inductance and increasing resistance in other leads. Leads that are

paralleled together also create closed loops that can support eddy currents.

5.13 Exercises

1. Two circular loops of thin wire are located as shown in Figure 5.23.

(a) Using Neumann's mutual inductance formula with numerical integration.
compute the mutual inductance between the two loops for b=5mm and

a=Imm, 2mm, 4mm, 8mm, 16mm, 32mm, 64mm, and 128mm.

(b) For wire radii of 0.0lmm, pu, = 1, and ¢ = 5.8 x 107S/m, compute the

inductance and resistance of each loop. Assume one loop is closed while

Figure 5.23. Two circular loops on the z-axis separated by distance a.

[PAGE 234]
220 Inductance Chapter 5

a small gap is introduced in the other to allow the insertion of a small
sinusoidal voltage source of negligible source impedance. Compute the
inductance and resistance of the resulting circuit for the spacings above

at a frequency of 10OMHz. Plot the results.

(c) Explain the trends in the plots.

2. Show that the partial mutual inductance between two orthogonal straight. thin

wires is zero,

3. Show that the partial mutual inductance between the two equal-length thin

wires shown in Figure 5.24 is

pa cos 6 2
M, = In | 1+ 4/------ |.
p 20 | + --_

Figure 5.24. Setup for partial mutual inductance calculation for equal-length thin

wires almost touching at one end.

4. Show that the inductance of a loop of thin wire of radius a formed into the

shape of an equilateral triangle is

3 pub 2b 3
L=- 2 ten ae
2a ln (>) 4 Ina}

[PAGE 235]
Section 5.13. Exercises 221

5. Show that the inductance of a loop of thin wire of radius a formed into a

square with side lengths of 6 is

b=" |in (2) -- inca + v9) + v3~ 7).

ue

6. Show that the partial mutual inductance between a square loop of thin wire
with side lengths a and a thin straight wire of length a at a distance b away,

as shown in Figure 5.25, is given by
ya a a _\* a+b\* até
Me = 5 || oaet 1+ (<4) - r+ (SH) +
pa a ay? b\? 2b
~ "imf = = ~ = =
20 m(es +()) i+ (2) 7H

if the current directions are as shown.

b+a b 0

Figure 5,25. Setup for partial mutual inductance calculation between a square

loop of thin wire and a straight thin wire.

7. Show that the external inductance per-unit-length for the coaxial line shown

Ley (?
0 On a/}°

in Figure 5.26 is given by

[PAGE 236]
222 Inductance Chapter 5

Figure 5.26. Cross section of a coaxial transmission line with outer conductor

thickness of t.

8. Show that the internal inductance per-unit-length for the outer shell of the

coaxial conductor in Figure 5.26 is given by

L_ uf (+t) mfott\)_ 5 6 _ ¢t
£ Qn | t2(2b + t)? b 8 4¢ 8(2b4+¢)|'

assuming a uniform DC current distribution.

9. Show that the internal inductance per-unit-length for the conductive tube in

Figure 5.27 is given by

Figure 5.27. Cross section of conductive tube with wall thickness t.

10. Show that the inductance per-unit-length of the coaxial line in Figure 5.26 is

Cog (2) 1 (b+ t)4 b+t 5 t
S=nfin(-)4+-4+4 2" pp (PT?) 9 _ OL --_
€or \a) "47 BQb+ ep a ( b ) 8 at BID

for uniform DC current distribution.

[PAGE 237]
Section 5.13. Exercises

11.

12.

13.

223

Show that the inductance per-unit-length of the annular coaxial line, formed

by replacing the center conductor in Figure 5.26 with the ring in Figure 5.27,

is

L U b 30 a t In (#48)
é ie lin() +3 At 82a +H)" (2)? (24 5)

(b+ t)4 (25) 5 Ob t |

* Bb + p2 dD) 8

8 4t 8(2b+4+2)
for uniform DC current distribution.

If the inductance per-unit-length for the annular coax in problem 11 is provided the functional notation L(a,b,t), where a is the inner radius, 6 is the
outer radius, and ¢ is the conductor thicknesses, show that a set of partial

inductances for the annular coax is

L, = La, ¢,t)
for the inner conductor,

LE, = L(b,c¢, t)

for the outer conductor, and

_ La,c,t) + L(b,c,t) ~ L(a, 0, t)
roo

M

M(a, b,c, t)
for the partial mutual. Note that c > b+t.

Show which of the two partial inductance matrices below represents an inter-

connect with lower inductance.

10 6 3
n=! 6 95
3.5 8

[PAGE 238]
224 Inductance Chapter 5

12 8 4
T2=-| 8 10 6
4 6 8

14. Using image theory, show that the inductance of a long round wire with radius
a and length 6 located a distance d, measured from the center, from a perfectly

conducting plane serving as the return path is
pb fl 2d
£L=--(----+2ln|/--} }.
An € fein a

15. Plot the input resistance and inductance for the circuit in Figure 5.28 for M=0

and M=4nH. Explain any differences in the results.

1Q

Figure 5.28. Circuit for problem 15.

16. Show that the partial inductances of the loop shown in Figure 5.29 can be

replaced by a single inductance given by

L=1,+L2-2M.

[PAGE 239]
225

Section 5.13. Exercises

vO) =

Figure 5.29. Equivalent partial inductance and inductance circuits.

17. Show that the partial inductances of the loop shown in Figure 5.30 can be

replaced by a single inductance given by

_ InLe -- M?
Ly, + Ly ---2M
L
--_-- VV

Figure 5.30. Another illustration of equivalent partial inductance and inductance

circuits.

18. Show that (5.58) is true.
19. Show that (5.59) is true.

20. An inductance matrix is given by

L M M/V3
L=| M LL eM
M/V3 ML

[PAGE 240]
226 Inductance Chapter 5

(a) Find T and \ for a modal decomposition.
(b) Sketch a circuit that implements the inductance matrix using the modal
decomposition.

(c) Derive conditions for the inductance matrix to remain passive.

21. A partial inductance matrix in H is
1x10-® 6107-9 4x 10-9
L=|6x10-9 8x10-9 5x 10-2
4x107-9 5x10-9 7x 107-9

The orthonormalized eigenvectors are computed to be

0.643779089 --0.323388434 --0.693518857
T = 0.595009865 0.781432736 0.187952496 | ,
0.481156675 ---0.533650448 0.695489363

while the corresponding eigenvalues in H are
A= 1.85350487 x 107% 2.10239342 x 10-9 4.36255787 x 1079

Simulate the circuit in Figure 5.31 using the partial inductance matrix directly
and by using a modal decomposition implemented completely within SPICE,
using voltage and current sources. Very small resistances may be needed in

series with the partial self-inductors due to the loop formed by £, and Lo.

oa 50 pF
} L p
0 Oo

Figure 5.31. Schematic for testing the modal decomposition of a partial inductance

matrix in problem 21,

[PAGE 241]
Section 5.13. Exercises

22.

23.

24.

25.

227

Show that the inductance matrix can be simplified for an open-circuit loop

by deleting the row and column in the matrix for that loop.

A partial inductance matrix with no reference lead is given by

10 4 2
L=| 46 3
2 3 4

Sketch three distinct but equivalent circuit' models with no reference lead.
Sketch another three distinct but equivalent circuit models with a reference

lead.

Assume that each lead of an interconnect has some resistance, then the voltage

drop across the interconnect is

dt?

mil

b= Rit+
where Ris a diagonal matrix. Find the modal decomposition for this problem.

Is there any simplification?

Show that the diagonal resistance matrix is passive when all entries are posi-

tive.

[PAGE 243]
Chapter 6

CAPACITANCE

Complete modeling requires consideration of both electric and magnetic fields. Inductance relates magnetic flux to current for a given geometry. Similarly, capacitance relates the electric field as represented by the voltage to charge. In this chapter, the simple case of capacitance between two conducting objects is examined
and then expanded for many conductors. Interconnects for digital systems typically
have a great many conductors, with counts easily reaching into the hundreds, so a
general multiconductor formulation of capacitance is essential. The concept of the

capacitance matrix and its negative off-diagonal terms is fundamental.

6.1 Definition of Capacitance

Consider two initially uncharged conductors as shown in Figure 6.1. With no charge.

the electric field is zero everywhere, so the voltage between the two conductors is also

Figure 6.1. Two uncharged conductors.

229

[PAGE 244]
230 Capacitance Chapter 6

Figure 6.2. Two charged conductors with resulting electric field.

zero. Now transfer a small amount of charge from conductor 1 to conductor 2. The
two conductors are now charged and produce an electric field as shown in Figure 6.2.
The field represents a gradient in the electric potential, and a potential difference. or
voltage, exists between the two conductors that is related to the quantity of charge

transferred. In general,

v= f(Q).

The function f is unknown at this point, but the fact that it is linear can be deduced.

Expanding f in a Maclaurin series, then
UV = a9 --a1Q + a2Q? +.43Q° +.---. (6.1)

When Q = 0 then v = 0, so ag must also equal be zero. The higher-order expansion
coefficients can be investigated through examination of Gauss's law.

In integral form, Gauss's law relates electric flux and charge according to

ffs [fea

where D is the electric flux density and p is the charge density. ¢ $6 D-ds sums the

normal component of the electric flux density over a closed surface, and [ffi p dV

[PAGE 245]
231

Section 6.1. Definition of Capacitance

finds the total charge enclosed within that surface. For simple materials, D = eE,

and with the total charge, Q = fff, odV, then Gauss's law applied to conductor 1

ff BB=-0 (6.2)

where Sj; is a closed surface around conductor 1 only. Changes in the value of Q

provides

do not affect either S; or €, so any change in Q must be reflected in the electric
field strength, EF'. Because (6.2) is linear, a doubling of @ must be accompanied by a
doubling of E since S$ is arbitrarily set. From its definition in (5.4), voltage is linear
with respect to the electric field, so doubling the charge also doubles the voltage.
Since the voltage is linearly dependent on the total charge, all of the nonlinear terms

in (6.1) must be zero. The general relationship between voltage and charge must be
v=ayj Q 3

which is conventionally written as Q = v/ay, with 1 /a, named the capacitance and

given the symbol C:
Q=Cv.

Capacitance relates the charge present on conductors to the voltage, or potential
difference, between them.

If the direction of the problem is reversed by taking the conductor with charge
--Q@ as the basis, then the sign on the voltage is reversed. Then --Q = --Cv, and the
original definition of capacitance is recovered. Therefore, the capacitance between
two conductors is the same whether looking from one conductor or the other, so

capacitance is reciprocal.

Example

Capacitance serves the role of a geometry factor to encapsulate the relationship
between charge and voltage for a particular configuration of conductors. Consider
the ideal parallel-plate capacitor shown in Figure 6.3. Assuming no fringing, then

Gauss's law applied to the surface described by the dotted line yields

[PAGE 246]
232

Capacitance Chapter 6

Figure 6.3. Capacitance calculation setup for the parallel-plate capacitor.

= ff D,daz dz
= Dy, {Ie da dz
1

f Das
5

The voltage between the plates is

Solving for Q, then

so the capacitance can be identified

= «h,A=--

-- «A
as C = -.

(6.3)

(6.4)

The capacitance captures the

physical properties of the structure and encapsulates them into a single constant

relating the voltage to the charge.

[PAGE 247]
233

Section 6.2. Capacitance between Several Conductors

6.2 Capacitance between Several Conductors

When more than two conductors are present, the simple relationship @ = Cv can
be repeatedly applied to obtain the capacitance relationships for the whole group.
Consider N conductors as illustrated in Figure 6.4, where each conductor is charged
and so has a potential difference with the grounded reference conductor. While the
quasi-static approximation holds, the potential difference between any two conductors is the difference in their voltages.

Between conductors i and j, a voltage of 1; -- v; exists that is supported by
the charge Qi; = Cjyj(vj; -- v3) on conductor 7 and by --Q;i; on conductor j. The
total charge on conductor i is the sum of these charges from each pairing between

conductor 7 and every other conductor. Explicitly writing out the sum yields

V,
V3

(0,
Cans

Figure 6.4. N-conductor setup for examination of capacitance between several]

conductors.

[PAGE 248]
234 Capacitance Chapter 6

Qi = Ciov1 + Cro(v1 -- ve) +--+ Cin (vi -- un)

Qo = Cai(ve -- v1) + Conve + +--+ Con (ve -- vy)

Qn = Cnui(vn -- v1) + Cno(un -- ve) ++--+ Cynon,

where the subscript 0 means electrostatic ground at zero potential. Collecting terms

on the voltages yields

Qi = (Cio+ Cia t---+Cym)vy -- Cygve --- +++ -- Clyun
Qe = --Co v0, + (C2) + Cog t---+ Con )u2 ---+++--Conun
Qn = --~Cniv, -- Cnove ---+++(Cwi + Cno tee + Cna)vun,

which can be succinctly stated in vector form as
Q=C, (6.5)

where C is the capacitance matrix (or short-circuit capacitance matrix) with the

general form

CrotCi2 +++: + Cin --Ci2 me --Cin
= --C21 CootCart---+ Can --- --C2Nn
CG = : (6.6)
--Cn1 --Cn2 7 Ono tCn1+Cwat:-:

For discussion, the entries in the capacitance matrix can be labcled as

Ci Cie ut Cin
-- Coy Cap an Con
Cc = . . . .

Cn, Cne2 "ct Cnn

Note how the diagonal terms of the capacitance matrix are not the capacitances
to ground for the conductors. In other words, Cig 4 C;;. To find the capacitance to

ground for conductor 7, sum across either row or column 7. Mathematically stated,

[PAGE 249]
235

Section 6.2. Capacitance between Several Conductors

then
N N
Cio = rer = So Cy.
j=l j=l

The diagonal term by itself gives the capacitance to ground when all other leads
are grounded. This case represents a somewhat worst-case capacitive loading for the
conductor, called the loading capacitance. The diagonal terms are also called the
coefficients of capacitance.

The off-diagonal terms of the capacitance matrix are always negative, indicating
that a positive voltage differential between conductors i and j induces a negative
charge on j. The capacitance between conductors is easily obtained from the capac-

itance matrix as

Cig = Cig, 1 Aj.

The off-diagonal terms are often referred to as mutual capacitances and as coefficients of induction.

Because of the reciprocity of capacitance, capacitance matrices are also reciprocal, so C, j= 5 jé, and the matrix is symmetric. The special form of the capacitance
matrix has implications for its passivity, which is examined in section 6.6.

With these definitions, a circuit model implementing a capacitance matrix can
be constructed by inspection. The model elements are often referred to as twoterminal capacitances to distinguish the mode} values from the matrix entries. A
simple example in Figure 6.5 demonstrates the construction of a circuit model from
a capacitance matrix.

Occasionally, a matrix will be encountered in which all of the matrix entries are
positive. While not a capacitance matrix, it still may be referred to as one. Such a
matrix will typically be a compilation of (two-terminal) capacitor values for use in
a circuit model; principally, the diagonal elements are the capacitances to ground

and the off-diagonal elements are the capacitances between conductors. In this case,

[PAGE 250]
236 Capacitance Chapter 6

ll -4 -]
C=|4 14 3
-1 -3 9
cr
__
(a)
1
4 3

Figure 6.5. Example capacitance matrix and its corresponding circuit model.

the matrix would be of the form

Cio Cig ++ Cin

-- C'o1 C20 sae Con

C= . ; , (6.7)
Cni Cn2 --- Cno

which carries the same information as the capacitance matrix in (6.6) but requires

[PAGE 251]
Section 6.3. Energy Definition of Capacitance 237

less effort to translate to a circuit model. It is important to note that (6.7) is a
compilation for convenience only and is not suitable for calculations of voltage or

charge vectors using (6.5) or any other formulation for a capacitance matrix.

6.3. Energy Definition of Capacitance

Since voltage is path-dependent, general-purpose electromagnetic simulators often
use an energy-based definition for capacitance for easier setup. From circuit theory,

the energy stored in a capacitor is
1
= =Cv',
9

while the result from electromagnetic field theory is

=5// D-Eadv.
2 Vv

Equating these two definitions and solving for C yields the energy definition for

c=5//[D-Bav (6.8)

A numerical simulation would normally set v = 1 for convenience.

capacitance as

Generalizing (6.8) for the case of multiple conductors leads to

1 en
Ci; = / / D; - E; dv. (6.9)
Vv

UyU;

The two field quantities (D; and E;) must be found from two separate computations; otherwise, there is no way to separate the two. A practical approach is to
ground all conductors except i to compute Cj;, a diagonal element of the capacitance
matrix, and then store the field. A second calculation with all conductors grounded
except j, yielding C; j, provides the second field quantity. Forming the dot product
of these two solutions and applying (6.9) yields the capacitance between the two
conductors, C';;, the negative of an off-diagonal entry in the capacitance matrix.
The full capacitance matrix can be filled out by repeating the process for every pair

of conductors.

[PAGE 252]
238 Capacitance Chapter 6

6.4 Frequency Dependence

For materials typically used in interconnects, such as metals, plastics, glass, fiberglass, and ceramics, capacitance between conductors is remarkably constant with
respect to frequency changes. The definition of capacitance suggests the mechanisms
for this constancy. Since C = Q/v, capacitance will change along with changes in the
charge and/or voltage. While DC leakage is negligible, and while time-varying fields
deposit negligible charge (a restatement of the quasi-static assumption), the charge
remains fixed. Also, under quasi-static conditions, the electric field remains constant
while frequency is varied, so the voltage remains constant as well. Therefore, under
these assumptions, the capacitance is constant with respect to frequency.

The frequency-independence of capacitance (while the lumped approximation
holds) can be exploited to measure the inductance of the loop formed by a single
interconnect and its return path. With both ends open-circuited, a low-frequency
capacitance measurement can establish C'. The interconnect is then shorted at one
end and a high-frequency sine-wave source is applied at the other, so a closed loop
is established. A frequency sweep by the source can be used to find the resonant
frequency of the circuit, w,. Since C is constant, then the inductance at the resonant

frequency is then solvable, knowing that w, = 1/VLC.

Example

If a vector network analyzer (VNA) is used as the source, a plot of the reflection
coefficient on a Smith chart (see chapter 8, section 8.3.5) allows a simple identification of w, as the frequency where the reflection coefficient is real. For example,
suppose 4 Capacitance measurement of an open-circuit package lead yields 5pF. One
end is shorted and the other is driven with a VNA, resulting in the Smith chart in
Figure 6.6. The frequency where it crosses the real axis is 1.54GHz, so solving for L
provides 2.14nH. The Smith chart also shows that at low frequencies, the normalized impedance is 0.1 and real. so the resistance of the circuit at low frequencies

is 0.1 x 502 = 59, assuming the Smith chart is normalized to 502. The data used

[PAGE 253]
239

Section 6.5. Circuit Equations with Capacitance

Figure 6.6. Smith chart of the reflection coefficient of an RLC circuit.

to plot the Smith chart use a 5pF capacitor in parallel to a 52 resistor and a 2nH
inductor in series. The high losses of this example pull the frequency sufficiently to

introduce a 7% error in the inductance extraction.

6.5 Circuit Equations with Capacitance

Capacitance can be folded into general circuit analysis through the continuity equa-

tion, which in integral form is

ff @=-5 fff oav. (6.10)

¢§, J-ds sums the total current flowing out of a volume and ff f., dV sums the
total charge within the volume. Therefore, the continuity equation states that net
current flow out of a volume must. be matched by a time rate of loss of charge within

the volume.

[PAGE 254]
240 Capacitance Chapter 6

The closed surface in (6.10) can be broken into several pieces as

firm-y [7%

and since current. is defined asi = ff si -ds, then

ff 7-B=Siv (6.11)

Replacing the total charge, Q = ffi, pdV, in (6.10) with Q@ = Cv and incorporating
(6.11) yields

N

; d
> *_o= -- (Cv).
k=]

As discussed in section 6.4, the capacitance is frequency-independent, and therefore
time-independent, so it can be brought out from under the time-derivative. Defining
t= an %% as the total current entering (note the change in current direction }

the volume from all sources, then the circuit relationship for capacitance is
du
i=C--.,
dt

The circuit relationship for a single capacitor can be generalized for the presence
of multiple conductors. For a closed surface around conductor k, the total current

entering the enclosed volume is

d
k= ae
d
= 7 (-Criti -- Crave -- ++:
dt

--(Cro + Cri + +++ )up -- +++). (6.12)

Distributing the time derivative to the voltage terms and stating in vector notation.

then

1,
All
al

(6.13)

[PAGE 255]
Section 6.6. Modal Decomposition and Passivity 241

6.6 Modal Decomposition and Passivity

A modal decomposition exists for capacitance, but its utility is less than that for
inductance, where the modal decomposition eliminates the great many mutual inductances. Because conductors shield each other, most capacitances between conductors within interconnects are negligible. With few mutual capacitances, there is
little incentive to implement a modal decomposition. However, modal decomposition

can prove that capacitance matrices are always passive.

6.6.1 Modal Decomposition

Paralleling the development in chapter 5, section 5.8.1, the real and symmetric
N x N capacitance matrix can be diagonalized by finding the eigenvalues and eigen-

vectors of
CU = ede, k=1,2,....N.

After orthonormalizing the eigenvectors, then

Ai O 0
T CT= ; (6.14)
0 O - Ay
where

Inverting (6.14) and substituting for C in (6.13) yields
t=TAT --.
, dt
* =f .
Moving J' under the time derivative and defining modal voltages and currents as

in equation (5.63), then

IT
va (6.15)

im == A

[PAGE 256]
242 Capacitance Chapter 6

+ + +

ml d, Vm 12 A, Vm2 * * * 'mN An VmN

Figure 6.7. Decoupled circuits for computing modal voltages from modal currents

to implement a capacitance matrix with a modal decomposition.

The circuit relationships embodied in (6.15) for the modal voltages and currents
can be implemented with decoupled circuits as shown in Figure 6.7, which would
ideally be coded into the simulator but could be implemented manually.

For the interconnect shown in Figure 6.8a, the modal currents are bin = Tt (a --
i"), The modal voltages computed in the N decoupled circuits of Figure 6.7 are

recombined according to 0 = T UJ, to obtain the values for the voltage sources in

Figure 6.8b.

i} i®
vy j ij> O >it
L -R V
15 7) roi
Vv jb - iR
2 2 O y 2
T a
iL Li
N N

Figure 6.8. The capacitive interconnect model in (a) can be replaced by the model

in (b) based on a modal decomposition of the capacitance matrix.

[PAGE 257]
243

Section 6.6. Modal Decomposition and Passivity

6.6.2 Passivity

For the capacitance matrix to be passive, each subcircuit in Figure 6.7 must be
passive. These circuits will be passive as long as the modal capacitances given by
the eigenvalues are nonnegative (see problem 2). Therefore. the capacitance matrix

is passive when
Apr 2OV kK.

In practice, positive eigenvalues are required since a zero eigenvalue represents all
open-circuited modal current.

Capacitance matrices have a special form in which the off-diagonals are negative,
the diagonal elements are positive, and the sum of any row or column is greater

than zero (with some capacitance to ground assumed). Mathematically,

N
Ci > Ss; Ci. (6.16)
j=l
j#Fi

For the standard eigenvalue problem, A¥ = AZ, Gersgorin's circle theorem! states
that every eigenvalue of A lies in at least one of the circles C,,C2,--- , Cx, where

C; is centered at A;; with a radius

N
y= S- |Aj,|.
j=l
jFi
Gersgorin's circle theorem is graphically illustrated in Figure 6.9.

Replacing the general matrix elements Aj; with their equivalents from the ca-

pacitance matrix, then

$$ eee
1. Richard Bellman, Introduction to Matrix Analysis. Philadelphia: SIAM, 1995, p. 107.

[PAGE 258]
244 Capacitance Chapter 6

Im[A k!

Figure 6.9. Graphical representation of Gersgorin's circle theorem.

ryo= S- Ci;
j=l
ji
Finally, the property in (6.16) ensures that
Tix Cuz.

Since circle C; is centered at Cu, the radius of the circle is small enough so that the
circles stay entirely in the right-hand plane. Since the eigenvalues always lie within
at least one circle, then the eigenvalues are always positive.

Unlike inductance matrices, where active matrices are possible and must be
checked for and avoided, capacitance matrices are always passive. Practically, this
means that capacitance matrices can be assembled or simplified, such as by deleting

small terms, without worrying about creating an active matrix.

6.7 Reference and Capacitance

Compared to inductance, construction of capacitive interconnect models is straightforward since each conductor already has open-circuited ends available for connec-

tions. Each conductor has capacitance to ground and to every other conductor. The

[PAGE 259]
Section 6.8. Model Reduction 245

values for these capacitances can be found directly from the capacitance matrix.
Since ground is defined when setting up the capacitance solution, its effects are
built into all of the capacitance values, which can be said to be referenced to the
particular ground selection.

Recall that for inductance, a reference lead is naturally created when a closed
loop is opened to permit connections to a circuit. The reference lead can take any
partial inductance value, and zero is a common choice. Whatever value is chosen,
the remaining partial inductances can be said to reference this lead.

Reference can then take two meanings in an interconnect model. For capacitance, it is the conductor assigned to zero potential (ground), while for inductance,
it is a conductor assigned an arbitrary partial inductance value, with zero being
common, but not necessary, due to the nonuniqueness of partial inductance. These
assignments do not need to be made to the same conductor. Usually, a large plane
of conductor is present within the circuit, and this conductor will be assigned to be
both the ground reference for the capacitance and the zero-valned partial inductance
reference for the inductance.

Ground is often described as being "perfect" with no inductance. Descriptions
along these lines confuse the two meanings of reference. First, ground is an electrostatic concept that has no place in inductance descriptions, which are magnetostatic
and therefore decoupled from electrostatics. Second, ground is a conductor like any
other, so it can have partial inductance, but most models choose to assign its partial

inductance value to be zero.

6.8 Model Reduction

Using the algorithms in chapter 4, section 4.5, capacitance matrices can be reduced
in size to incorporate known information. The principal cases are when model leads
are grounded, floated, and paralleled together.

The reduction for grounded conductors can be found by setting the voltage

for each grounded conductor to zero in (6.5) and then retaining the charges for

[PAGE 260]
246 Capacitance Chapter 6

the nongrounded conductors. The net result is that the row and column in the
capacitance matrix for each grounded conductor is deleted from the matrix.
For floating conductors, the charge is zero. The charge on a conductor can be set
=-1

to zero by deleting the appropriate row andcolumninC . The reduced capacitance

matrix for floating conductors is then given by
= --T---1--\~!
C= (4 C ") ,

using (4.16).
For paralleled conductors, the admittance relationship between voltage and current can be used with the formulation in chapter 4, section 4.5.2 to parallel conduc-

tors together.

6.9 Exercises

1. Assume that a 3 x 3 capacitance matrix is known for a three-conductor interconnect. If line 1 is grounded while line 3 has 1V applied. what is the
voltage on line 2, assuming it is floating? What are the charges on all three

conductors?

2. Show that a capacitance matrix is passive when all of its eigenvalues are

greater than or equal to zero.

3. What does it mean if the sum across a row or column of a capacitance matrix

is zero? How can this be physically realized?

4. Compute the capacitance of a parallel-plate capacitor using the energy defi-

nition of capacitance. Neglect the fringing fields.

5. A capacitance matrix is given by
C --Cm, Them / V3
Cc = ~COm Cc --C rp,
--Cyn, / V3 --Cm C

[PAGE 261]
Section 6.9. Exercises 247

(a) Find T and X for a modal decomposition.

(b) Sketch a circuit that implements the capacitance matrix using the modal

decomposition.

(c) Derive conditions for the capacitance matrix to remain passive.

6. Given the capacitance matrix for a three-conductor interconnect as

10 -3 -1
C= --3 5 --2 5)
-l -2 i)

(a) Find the capacitance matrix for the two-conductor interconnect. when

lead 2 is grounded. Sketch a schematic.

(b) Find the capacitance matrix for the two-conductor interconnect when

lead 2 is floating. Sketch a schematic.

[PAGE 263]
Chapter 7

RESISTANCE

Interaction between resistance and inductance creates two effects important to interconnect modeling: the skin effect and current crowding, also referred to as the
proximity effect. In both cases, currents distribute differently at low and high frequencies to minimize the overall reactance of the circuit. At low frequencies, inductive reactance is negligible, so the currents spread out to minimize resistance. A
side effect of this optimization is that the inductance increases. At high frequencies, inductive reactance dominates resistance, so the currents crowd together to
minimize inductance, and resistance is increased. Redistribution of current towards
the outside surface of a conductor is called the skin effect. Redistribution of current parallel to the surface is called current crowding. Both types are depicted in
Figure 7.1, where at low frequencies in Figure 7.1a, the current is spread across the
cross section of the wire and the width of the ground plane. At high frequencies in
Figure 7.1b, the currents redistribute to the surface of the wire (skin effect) and to
the area under the wire (current crowding and skin effect).

A widely discussed generic example of current crowding is shown in Figure 7. 2a,
where an interconnect. uses a plane to return the current, but a slot in the ground
plane interferes with the current path. The components of the current supporting
the high-frequency content of the signal (ie., the parts creating sharp edges in
high-speed signaling) crowd underneath the signal line to maximize the mutual

inductance between the line and the plane. The slot forces the current away from

249

[PAGE 264]
250 Resistance Chapter 7

Skin Effect

R>>oaoL

(a) (b)

Figure 7.1. Current crowding in interconnects: (a) low-frequency current distribu-

tion, (b) high-frequency current distribution.

Current

Flow Slot in Ground

Plane

Low-Frequency
Components

High-Frequency
Ground Components

Plane

Signal Line Signal Line

{a) (b)

Figure 7.2. Two examples of current crowding in interconnects: (a) return currents

on a plane must route around a slot, (b) low-frequency components can cut the

corner of a bend.

[PAGE 265]
251

the signal line, thereby defeating the beneficial current crowding and causing the
inductance to increase. A secondary effect is increased crosstalk if the slot. causes
the ground currents to pass near other signal lines. Good high-frequency design
requires the minimization or elimination of slots in ground planes.

A second example of current crowding is sketched in Figure 7.2b. The highfrequency components of the current on the ground plane track under the signal
line to minimize inductance, while the low-frequency components cut the corner
to minimize resistance. Unlike slots, where all frequency components are rerouted.
current crowding at bends has little performance impact.

Skin effects and current crowding lead to frequency-dependent resistance that
affects circuits by inducing conductor-loss dispersion. Low-frequency components of
the signal are barely affected, while high-frequency components can see significant
attenuation. By knocking down the amplitudes of only the high-frequency components, conductor-loss dispersion causes edge rate degradation and rounding of sharp
corners. While signal degradation of any kind is normally regarded as undesirable.
too much high-frequency content can lead to excessive crosstalk. In circuits with
the potential for high levels of crosstalk, inclusion of skin effects can be important
to avoid pessimistic simulations of noise levels.

Analytical approaches to the skin effect and current crowding do not yield very
much in the way of useful formulas. For the skin effect, the round wire far from
its return path can be exactly solved. Current crowding is far too dependent on
geometrical and material considerations for the existence of a canonical problem.
To clearly demonstrate current crowding and the skin effect, several problems are
set up and solved in an intuitive circuit simulation style.

The methodology employed is a manual implementation of a technique called
Partial Equivalent Electric Circuit (PEEC), which is itself a straightforward application of circuit theory. The basic approach is to subdivide all conductors and then
assume that the current is uniform in each piece. The DC resistance and inductance

of each piece is computed based on a library of formulas, then a circuit is formed

[PAGE 266]
252 Resistance Chapter 7

with these elements. Finally, the circuit is solved with a circuit simulator such as
SPICE. The interaction between resistance and inductance naturally leads to skin
effects and current crowding. Accuracy improves with finer-grained subdivision of

the original geometry.

7.1 Skin Effect

The skin effect is simply current crowding taking place within the cross section of a
single conductor. The effect can be demonstrated by subdividing a square wire into
three equal subsections, as shown in Figure 7.3a. With this subsectioning scheme.
skin effects can only develop in the vertical direction. To enable skin effects in the
horizonal direction, a nine-subsection or greater scheme is required, as suggested in
Figure 7.5. Each subsection has resistance, partial self-inductance, and partial mutual inductance to the other two pieces. Assuming that the DC values are available.
then the circuit can be described as shown in Figure 7.3b. Note that AZ; > M> due
to proximity.

The voltage drop across the resistor/inductor pairs is given by

I.

Nl

V=

@ (b)

Figure 7.3. A rectangular conductor subdivided into three sections.

[PAGE 267]
Section 7.1. Skin Effect 253

The parallel connections force all voltages to be equal to one, so for this circuit

1 R+jwh juM, jwMe2 fy
1 = jw; A+ jeL JWM, Tp
1 jwMe jwMy, R+jwL T3

Inverting the matrix enables a direct solution for the currents, then f= ++ Js.
Since V = 1, then the equivalent impedance for the original conductor is Z = 1/J.
The equivalent resistance is Re[Z], while the equivalent inductance is Im[Z]/w.

To see the skin effect, the magnitudes of the currents can be compared. Taking
the ratio of the current in the outer section! to that in the inner yields

qh

(My ~ Mz)(2L -- 3M, + Mz)w?
Bl = 1+

7 R2 + (L _ 2M, + M2)?w

In terms of frequency, this equation is of the form

au?
1+ bw?'

fw) =14 (7.1)

which increases monotonically from a DC value to the asymptotic limit of 1+ a/b.
The current in the wire is then evenly distributed at DC and crowds to the outside
of the wire as frequency increases. With only three subsections to the wire, there isa
limit on how much crowding occurs. Note that it is assumed that 2L--3M 1+Me > 0,
which is normally true since L > M, > Mo.

Redistribution of current due to the skin effect causes the resistance and induc-

tance of the wire to change. The equivalent resistance is

r= 242 (Ad, -- Mz)? Ru?
"3° 89R? + (3L -- 4M, + MQ)20?'

Note that the basic form of the frequency dependence tracks that of the current
distribution. At DC, the resistance is the expected value of R/3. As frequency increases, the area utilized by the current decreases, so R monotonically increases. The
important and general result here is that the skin effect always increases resistance

with frequency.

1. By symmetry, I, = J3.

[PAGE 268]
254 Resistance Chapter 7

The equivalent inductance is

1 2 (My -- M2)?(3L -- 444, + Mz)?
Lea = 5 (3L + 43, + 2M2) - 9 9f2 + (3h 4M tM )2w2

As for the resistance, the basic form follows that of the current distribution. As
the currents vacate the center of the wire, internal inductance is reduced, and the
inductance decreases monotonically from its DC value to an asymptotic limit. The
skin effect always decreases inductance with frequency. Just as for the current, under
normal conditions 32 -- 4M, + Mz > 0.

The increase in resistance as the currents shift to the skin of the conductor
is the defining characteristic of the skin effect. With increasing frequency. more
of the current crowds to the outside of the wire, causing increased resistance and
decreased inductance. The skin depth is defined as the distance from the surface to
where the current drops to 1/e of its value at the surface. Therefore, the skin depth
is frequency-dependent and decreases with increasing frequency.

For any given interconnect, the importance of the skin effect can be examined
by considering the ratio of the skin depth to the conductor thickness (6/t), and
there are three regimes to consider. For 5/t >> 1, the current has the DC distribution, resistance is low, inductance is high, and there is little frequency dependence.
For 6/t = 1, resistance begins increasing while inductance begins decreasing. This
transition region is characterized by a knee in the frequency dependence of both
resistance and inductance, and can be seen in the example in Figure 7.7, where the
knee frequency is approximately 0.1MHz. For 6 /t <1, the currents reside on the
outer surface of the conductor. Resistance increases strongly with frequency as less
and less area is available. Inductance is constant because the internal inductance is
shielded.

At frequencies above the knee frequency, the resistance has a square root dependence on frequency. For conductors with no sharp corners and at frequencies where

the conductor is several skin depths thick, the classic skin depth formula is

[PAGE 269]
255

Section 7.2. Current Crowding

where [t = fér/lg and plo = 4x x 10~7H/m is the permeability of free space. For the
vast majority of interconnect materials, the relative permeability is yu, = 1.
Magnetic materials with yz, >> 1 are used in some packages. Nickel is often used
in very thin layers as an adhesion promoter, but it is generally so thin that it has
insignificant impact. Leadframes are often fabricated from Alloy 42, especially in
ceramic packages such as CERDIP and CQFP, because of the excellent match of
the coefficients of thermal expansion (CTE) between Alloy 42 and the glasses used
to seal together the two ceramic halves. Alloy 42 has a high relative permeability
near 200, which leads to well-developed skin effects and high losses at remarkably
low frequencies. Plating with nonmagnetic metals can reduce or eliminate the detrimental effects of Alloy 42 by providing a parallel current path through metal with

low permeability.

7.2 Current Crowding

A simple structure that can be easily analyzed to demonstrate current crowding

is shown in Figure 7.4a, where conductor 1 represents a signal line with a return

, L
Iv, &

OZ f i!
@)

(a) (b)

|

Figure 7.4. A loop formed by a single conductor and a return path with two

parallel conductors.

[PAGE 270]
256 Resistance Chapter 7

path formed by conductors 2 and 3. The subsectioning scheme enables current
crowding on the return path. The proximity of the various subsections indicates
that 4; > M3. Skin effects are not possible but could be included by subdividing
the conductors in thickness. Each subsection has resistance, partial self-inductance,
and partial mutual inductance to the other two pieces. Assuming that the DC values
are available, then the circuit can be described as shown in Figure 7.4b.

The circuit has the constraints that

h+le+lz = 0

Y=1
v= 0
v3 = 0.

With these, the voltage drop across the resistor/inductor pairs is given by

1-V R+ jwL gw My jwMs I,
-V = juwM, R+ jwh quwMo I> ;
-V jwMs jwM, R+jwh --Ir-Iy

which provides three equations for the three unknowns V, i. and Io.
'To see current crowding, the magnitudes of the currents can be compared, Taking

the ratio of the currents in the two conductors of the return path yields

Bi? 4(L -- Mz)(M, -- M3)w?
Ts R24 (L-- M, -- M2 + M3)2w? -

In terms of frequency, this equation is of the form in (7.1) that monotonically
increases from a DC value toa high-frequency asymptotic limit. At DC, the currents
are evenly distributed on the return path, but as frequency increases, the currents
crowd underneath the signal line.

Redistribution of current due to crowding causes the resistance and inductance
of the loop to change. The equivalent impedance is found by solving for J; and then
inverting. The equivalent resistance is

3. 1 (My -- My)? Ru?
Reg -- = R 4 = Ma) Ret
oO OR + (LE M)2w

[PAGE 271]
Section 7.3. PEEC Method 257

Note that the basic form of the frequency dependence tracks that of the current
distribution. At DC, the resistance is the expected value of 32/2. As frequency
increases, the area utilized by the current decreases, so # monotonically increases.
The important and general result here is that current crowding always increases
resistance with frequency.

The equivalent inductance is

] 1 (LZ -- Mz)(AQ, -- M3)?w?
Log = 2L ~My, +4My ~My -- 2! 2)(Ah -- Ms)

2 2 2 Re + (L _ Aly)?w*

As for the resistance, the basic form follows that of the current distribution. As
the currents crowd under the signal line, mutual inductance is enhanced so loop
inductance drops. Current crowding always decreases inductance with increasing

frequency.

7.3. PEEC Method

The Partial Equivalent Electric Circuit (PEEC) method builds up models of complex interconnect structures from simple primitive elements. such as rectangular
bars, to find frequency-dependent resistance and inductance. Although many approaches are possible, the easiest is to compute the DC resistance and static partial
self-inductance for each primitive element, plus the partial mutual inductance between each pair of elements. The resistances and inductances are then assembled
into a complete circuit and solved with a circuit simulator. Accuracy improves
with finer-grained subdivision of the original geometry. The interaction between
resistance and inductance naturally leads to frequency-dependent. skin effects and
current crowding.

The previous two sections use a manual implementation of the PEEC method to
derive frequency-dependent impedances for either the skin effect or current crowding. However, all crowding effects can be accommodated simultaneously if the conductors are sufficiently subdivided. For example, Figure 7.5 shows an interconnect

with two signals and a plane return path. The conductors are subdivided to capture

[PAGE 272]
Resistance Chapter 7

258

Figure 7.5. Fine subdivision for capturing all current crowding effects using the

PEEC method.

skin effects, current crowding on the return path, and current crowding between the
signals. If the signals bend, then further subdivision of the conductors is needed in
the direction of current flow.

Since the PEEC method leads to a conventional circuit, any circuit simulation
technique is applicable. For example, a full PEEC-based model of a socket can be included with driver and receiver models in a SPICE simulation. The main advantage
of including the full PEEC model is that the interconnect's frequency-dependent
behavior is completely included. Unfortunately, this approach becomes impractical
for complex PEEC models that can quickly overwhelm any circuit simulator.

To limit the circuit size for practical circuit simulation, the size of the PEEC
model must usually be reduced. The PEEC model by itself is a linear circuit, while
general-purpose circuit simulators must handle nonlinear circuit elements. A good
strategy is to precompute a simplified PEEC model using a linear solver, then the
simplified model can be used in the nonlinear circuit simulator. The primary disadvantage of this methodology is that the circuit elements in the reduced PEEC
model are frequency-dependent, but time-domain simulators often do not accom-

modate frequency-dependent elements well, if at all.

7.3.1 General Formulation

The problem setup is the same whether a general-purpose or dedicated solver is used.

All of the conductors in the problem must first be subdivided into N canonical prim-

[PAGE 273]
Section 7.3. PEEC Method 259

itive structures, such as rectangular bars, for which formulas for resistance, partial
self-inductance, and partial mutual inductance are known. These small, generically
shaped conductors are called branches. Many implementations are possible, but the
most straightforward approach assumes that the current is uniform across the cross
section of the branches. Then relatively simple DC resistance and static inductance
formulas are applicable.

The resistance and partial self-inductance of each branch is computed along with
the partial mutual inductance between each branch. The results can be assembled
into a diagonal N x WN resistance matrix and a dense N x N partial inductance

matrix. The voltage drop across each branch is

= Zp, (7.2)

where J, are the branch currents. It is assumed that the structure is subdivided in
an appropriate way to enable all necessary current flow.

To complete the model of the interconnect, the branches are tied together at
a number of nodes, M, where the number of nodes depends on the subdivision
used. For example, the breakdown in Figure 7.4 uses three nodes connecting three
branches. Because voltages are potential differences, one node must serve as the
reference with a voltage of zero. This node, called the datum node, is not included
in the problem setup--it is assumed, The same situation occurs in general-purpose
circuit simulators such as SPICE, where the datum node is labeled as "O" and forms
the ground reference.

At this point, the interconnect has been broken into its component parts and
modeled with a circuit consisting of resistances and partial self- and mutual inductances. The circuit must be solved with either a general-purpose or dedicated

simulator.

[PAGE 274]
260 Resistance Chapter 7

7.3.2. Dedicated Solver

A dedicated solver? for the PEEC method can be constructed by satisfying Kirchhoff's voltage and current laws for the branch voltages and currents. The goal is to
eliminate the branch voltages and currents in favor of node voltages and currents.
Then the nodes internal to the circuit can be eliminated to obtain a simplified model
relating just the external nodes, or ports. The model is used by connecting the ports
to other system components, such as drivers and receivers.

The branch voltages are related to the node voltages by differences: the difference of the two node voltages at the ends of a branch is the branch voltage. This

relationship for the entire problem can be stated as
Vi = AVn, (7.3)

where A, called the incidence matriz, stores all of the connection information in an
N x M matrix. It can be constructed by setting A,; = 1 and A,; = ~1 when the
current flows from node 7 to node j through branch b. For example, the incidence

matrix for the network in Figure 7.6 is

--] 0 0 0 1

= 0 -1 0 0 1
A = ,

0 0 -1 1 0

0 0 0 1 -1

showing how the node voltages subtract to obtain the branch voltages.

Continuing the formulation, the total current into the nodes is given by

- =T_
I, =A Ih, (7.4)
where J, are the branch currents driven by the branch voltages, and Tn are currents
driven into the nodes by external sources. For the example in Figure 7.6,
eee

2. R. B. Wu, C. N. Kuo, and K. K. Chang, "Inductance and resistance computations for three-

dimensional multiconductor interconnection structures," IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech.,

vo]. 40, no. 2, Feb. 1992, pp. 263-71.

[PAGE 275]
1
Section 7.3. PEEC Method 26

--] 6) 0 0
0 -I1 0 0
=T
0 0) 1 1
1 1 0 -1

showing how the node currents are summed from the branch currents. In general.
most of the J, are zero since current is externally supplied only at the ports.
The branch voltages and currents can be eliminated by substituting (7.2) and

(7.3) into (7.4) to get

=T--- l= __
In=A Z, AVy. (7.5)

The currents and voltages at the vast majority of the nodes are of no interest. The
nodes of interest are for external connections at the ports, so (7.5) needs to be
reduced. For all of the internal nodes, In, = 0, so the reduction can be performed
by inverting (7.5) and then deleting the rows and columns representing the internal nodes. The remaining matrix is then the desired equivalent impedance matrix

relating the node voltages at the ports to the external node currents entering the

[PAGE 276]
Resistance Chapter 7

262

ports. Row and column deletion can be stated mathematically as shown in chap-

ter 4, equation (4.16), leading to a succinct formula for the equivalent impedance

as

Pp

-1
Zeq=B (4 Z A) B (7.6)

since

Vn = Zeqln (7.7)

for the ports only.

While the formulation of the PEEC method represented by (7.6) is quite simple, the solution requires two matrix inversions plus four matrix multiplications.
Matrix inversion is an expensive numerical operation, so PEEC methods can be
slow for large numbers of branches. Fortunately, several efficiency enhancements?
are available that enable the PEEC method to solve very large problems.

Skin effects and current crowding can be investigated if the branch currents are

known. Combining (7.2) with (7.3) and (7.7) yields

--_ =-l= =>
I, = Zy A Leg In,

where J,, are the port currents. The branch currents can be computed for any given

excitation at the ports.

7.3.3 In-Circuit Solution

In a typical application, (7.6) is used to obtain a reduced model at a given frequency.
If the frequency dependence is strong over the bandwidth of interest, then a table
of frequency-dependent data can be generated and then modeled with a wideband
technique, such as a ladder network or a rational function polynomial.

For cases where Zp is sufficiently small, the reduction in (7.6) can be skipped

and Z, can be included directly into the full circuit simulation. The frequency

3. M. Kamon, M. Tsuk, and J. White, "FASTHENRY: A multipole-accelerated 3-D inductance
extraction program," [EEE Trans. Microwave Theory Teck., vol. 42. no. 9, Sept. 1994, pp. 1750-
58.

[PAGE 277]
Section 7.3. PEEC Method 263

dependence of the structure is then fully captured in the circuit simulation without
resorting to a wideband modeling technique. Only when the simulation time is too
slow should Zp be reduced.

In other words, Zeq represents a precharacterization step that reduces runtime in
the circuit simulation while freezing the model at.a single frequency. Once precharac-

terization is performed, frequency dependence is recovered only through additional

modeling.

7.3.4 Practical Issues

The PEEC method can solve very large resistance and inductance problems with
high accuracy while capturing skin effects and current crowding. A fundamental
limit is that the humped approximation must hold. In practice, the geometry cannot.
be broken down into arbitrarily small primitives, so the user typically has considerable influence on the solution through the particular subdivision scheme selected.
Therefore, use of PEEC methods can require some electromagnetics expertise from
the user to obtain good results. Finally, the PEEC modeling scheme is not extendable to capacitance calculations, so another method, such as the boundary element
method, is required with new modeling requirements. In other words, the practitioner may need to build two separate models of the same structure to obtain a

complete lumped model.

7.3.5 Example: PEEC Computation of Coaxial Inductance

The per-unit-length inductance of coaxial transmission line can be computed using
the PEEC method by breaking the conductors into annular rings, as shown in
Figure 7.8. The PEEC method requires formulas for the partial self-inductance of
each ring, the partial mutual inductance between any pair of rings, plus the DC
resistance of each ring. A suitable set of equations for the partial self- and mutual
inductances is available from chapter 5, problem 12. The DC resistance is easily

computed from the ring areas.

[PAGE 278]
264 Resistance Chapter 7

The PEEC method for this calculation is implemented in a C program listed in
Appendix B. Sample computed results are shown in Figure 7.7. Note the convergence
in the inductance calculation for increasing numbers of thinner rings: accuracy at
higher frequencies is a function of granularity of the decomposition. For resistance,
thinner rings increase the upper frequency for accurate resistance calculation, but
the exact profile is not obtainable because PEEC models always plateau at the
resistance of the outer ring when all of the currents have crowded there.

An interesting aspect of this problem is the use of a reference ring located outside
the coax to allow the use of inductance formulas for partial inductance calculations.
Except for numerical stability issues raised by far placements of the reference ring,

the solution is independent of the reference ring location.

7.4 Ladder Networks

PEEC methods can handle arbitrary conductor cross sections while accurately computing frequency-dependent resistance and inductance due to the skin effect and
current crowding. However, as a modeling tool, a PEEC breakdown inconveniently
produces many elements since every branch is coupled to every other branch by
partial mutual inductance. For round wires, a simple ladder network can model the
skin effect. while using no partial mutual inductances. Ladders can also be used to
approximate wires with other cross sections.

The PEEC method is an integral solution to Maxwell's equations, so to develop
a different model, a differential equation relating the magnetic field and current
is derived and solved with a finite-element solution that leads directly to a ladder
network. The approach does not incorporate the return path and so produces a
model of the frequency-dependent partial self-inductance of the wire.

In good conductors, Maxwell's equations can be specialized to a simpler form.
Conduction currents dominate displacement currents, so J >> gD and displacement
currents can be neglected. Ohm's law holds, so J -- oF, where c is the conductivity.
Finally, the constitutive relation B = uH holds for regular metals. With these

modifications, Faraday's and Ampere's laws in differential form are converted from

[PAGE 279]
265
Section 7.4. Ladder Networks 6

240
220
&
= 200
i=}
é
= 180
o
=
z
= 160 5 rings ----
10 rings
20 rings --~-
140 40 rings -- -
120
10° 10° 104% 103 107 10! 10° 10! 402 103 104
Frequency, MHz
Le ee ee
0.25 5 rings ----
10 rings -----
20 rings -- -
E 0.20 40 rings -- -
aq
o
5 ONS Fe
re 0.10
0.05

0
10° 10° 104 103 102 10! 10° 10! 192 493 104
Frequency, MHz

Figure 7.7. Inductance and resistance of copper coax with a = 0.001m 6 = 0.002m

with an outer conductor thickness of just under 0.001m for several levels of decomposition.

[PAGE 280]
Resistance Chapter 7

266
V 7 oB
* at
Vv a7 22
xa at
to
_ OH
V >< J= HOA (7.8)
VxH=J. (7.9)

Rotational symmetry holds for round wires. It is convenient in these cases to

use cylindrical coordinates where

P ro z
-- 1
VxA=-|2 2 2 (7.10)
A, rAg Az

for any vector A. With symmetry and the lumped approximation, then 3 = Z = 0

and (7.10) simplifies to

. 0A,- 190 .
-- al
O+ a (rAg)é (7.11)

From chapter 5, problem 7, the magnetic field strength external to a round wire

4 4

H = --4, (7.12)

Qnr
where 7 is the total current enclosed within the radius r. Substituting this into (7.9)
and using (7.11) yields

_ 1 &.

which shows that J is directed only in the 2 direction. (This is not much of a surprise
since this fact is assumed to derive (7.12).) With only a 2 component, the subscript

z can be dropped.

[PAGE 281]
Section 7.4. Ladder Networks 267

Figure 7.8. Subdivision of a round wire into concentric rings for finite-element

solution.

Using a finite-element method,' the cross section of the round wire can be subdivided into concentric conductive rings as shown in F igure 7.8. The rings are numbered from the outside in. To match up to (7.12), the variable i, is defined to be
the sum of the currents in ring & and all the rings it encloses. The total current in
the wire is then i1.

The current density in ring k is J, and is assumed to be constant with respect
to r (i.e., the DC current distribution). All of the J, flow in the same direction. The
current in ring & is 4, --i,11 and can be found by integrating (7.13) from the ring's

inner radius to its outer radius to get

tk _ tk+1 = mre _ rease

= Aj Je. (7.14)

where A, is just the area of ring k.

eee
4. C. H. Yen, Z. Fazarinc, and R. UL. Wheeler, "Time-domain skin-effect model for transient

analysis of lossy transmission lines," Proc. IEEE, vol. 70, no. 7, July 1982, pp. 750-757.

[PAGE 282]
268 Resistance Chapter 7

Combining (7.8) and (7.12) with (7.11) and the fact that J has only a z com-

ponent yields

a7, 1 Gi
or --# Qrr Ot

Converting the spatial derivative into a difference equation and using (7.14) to

eliminate J yields

(a1 = te) / Anni (te miei r)/An 9 1 dik (7.15)
Tk_1--Tk 27r;, dt

This equation can be converted into a circuit equation by defining

1

Ry, = --
k oA,

as the resistance per-unit-length of ring k, and
l= oa lr
as the partial self-inductance per-unit-length of the ring. Combining these definitions with (7.15} produces
Re-i(te--1 -- ik) -- Re lik -- ini) = ne (7.16)

The difference equation in (7.16) is implemented for each ring with a small subcircuit as shown in Figure 7.9a. The subcircuits are joined together at the common
resistors to obtain the complete ladder network in F igure 7.9b. shown for a four-step
ladder. The ladder produces the resistance and partial self-inductance for a round
wire. A physical model still requires the closure of the loop.

The ladder does not need to be very deep to capture all frequency dependence
from DC to the breakdown of the lumped approximation. Depending on the closeness of fit, ladders with depths of three to five are sufficient. Accuracy and depth can

be optimized through selection of the ring areas. For example. a constant resistance

ratio Ry /Ry41 has advantages.®

3. C. H. Yen, Z. Fazarinc, and R. L. Wheeler, "Time-domain skin-effect model for transient

analysis of lossy transmission lines," Proc. LEEE, vol. 70, no. 7, July 1982, pp. 750-757.

[PAGE 283]
269
Section 7.4. Ladder Networks

Figure 7.9. Ladder networks can compute the frequency-dependent inductance

and resistance of round wires: (a) circuits representing each difference equation in

(7.16), (b) complete ladder combining the subcircuits in (a) for a four-step ladder.

[PAGE 284]
270 Resistance Chapter 7

For general wire cross sections, a ladder can be fitted to existing data through
optimization with a circuit simulator or through a continued fraction expansion from
a rational function approximation. Rational function approximation is discussed in
chapter 10, section 10.4.1, and an example of ladder construction with continued

fractions is included.

7.5 Transresistance

Nonzero off-diagonal terms, called transresistances, often appear in resistance matrices, and they represent resistance in shared sections of interconnects, such as a
ground plane serving as a common return path. For example, the two-port model

in Figure 7.10 has the resistance matrix

77 Ry + Ro Ro
Re Ro+ Re

using the result from problem 14 in chapter 4.

SPICE Implementation

Given a resistance matrix with off-diagonal terms, it can be very difficult to synthesize a network to implement the shared resistance. Unfortunately, SPICE does
not provide a transresistance element as it does the mutual inductor for im plementing "transinductance." The transresistance element must be synthesized using a

current-controlled voltage source.

Figure 7.10. A two-port circuit with common resistance leading to off-diagonal

entries in the resistance matrix.

[PAGE 285]
271

Section 7.6. Exercises

The transresistance element relates the voltage on line m to the current on linen

according to
Um = Rmnin-

The current-controlled voltage source allows a direct implementation of this formula.
The current is detected in line n using any component (although particular SPICE
versions may require the use of a 0-volt voltage source), and then a voltage with
weight Rinzin is inserted into line m. For example, the 2 x 2 resistance matrix given
by

Rit Rie

Rig Rag

aul
il

can be implemented in SPICE as

Ra ni n2 Rill
Rb n4 n& R22
Ha n2 n3 Rb R12
Hib n5 n6 Ra R12.

The input and output terminals for lead 1 are n1 and n3, while for lead 2 they are

n4 and né6.

7.6 Exercises

1. Using the PEEC formalism in (7.6), set up the skin effect problem in Fig-

ure 7.3.

2. Using the PEEC formalism in (7.6), set up the current crowding problem in
Figure 7.4.

3. (a) Using the PEEC method, compute and plot the frequency-dependent
resistance and inductance of the braided twin-lead transmission line in
Figure 7.11. The braids consist of seven packed strands of 22-gauge copper (o = 5.8 x 10'S/m) wire. Cover the frequency range from DC to the

high-frequency asymptotic limit for the inductance.

[PAGE 286]
272 Resistance Chapter 7

g

Jem --___>-

Not to Scale

Figure 7.11. Twin-lead transmission line with braided conductors.

(b) For one of the braided leads, compute and plot the currents in each strand

as a function of frequency for a total lead current of 1A.

(c) Assuming the transmission line is embedded in a homogeneous material
with a dielectric constant of 4, estimate the capacitance of the transmission line and compute the frequency-dependent characteristic impedance

and phase velocity.

(d) Discuss any need to apply the PEEC method to the individual strands

of wire.

4. For a trace on a PCB using loz copper, what is the approximate maximum
clock frequency for which skin effect losses are negligible? Assume that the
edge rate is 20% of the clock period and that the trace width is much greater
than its thickness. Let oo, = 5.8 x 107S/m, and loz copper is 39.6um thick.

3. Using the technique of section 7.4, derive a ladder network to model the
skin effect in a wide rectangular slab of conductor using a subdivision into

horizontal bars.

6. A two-port network is described by the impedance matrix

NI
II

10 5 3x107-9 2» {9-9
+ jw
5 8 2x10-9 5x 10-9

[PAGE 287]
Section 7.6. Exercises 273

Implement this matrix in SPICE with and without current-controlled voltage
sources. Using SPICE's AC capability, compute the network's 2 x 2 impedance
matrix and show that the two implementations give the same result for a

frequency sweep from DC to 10GHz.

[PAGE 289]
Chapter 8

MEASUREMENT OF
PARASITICS

Interconnections in digital systems are intentionally made to be very good to minimize degradation in signal quality as signals move from driver to receivers. As a
result, the parasitic capacitances and inductances in the interconnects are quite
small and require careful characterization if accurate values are to be obtained. For
example, package lead inductances can easily range down to 1nH to 15nH with capacitances of 0.1pF to 2pF. For the reactance of a 1nH loop to reach a measurable
19, the characterization frequency must be as high as 160MHz.

Interconnect parasitics are inconveniently configured in a mechanical sense. A
wirebond cannot be plugged into an LCR meter to find its inductance. Special
fixturing and/or probes are typically required along with careful consideration of
the path for the return currents. The measured inductance is critically dependent
on the area of the loop formed by the signal and return path. Similarly, capacitance
is strongly affected by the distance to nearby conductors.

Typical equipment in digital laboratories includes source generators, oscilloscopes, logic analyzers, and low-frequency probes. The bandwidths on these instruments are geared towards digital needs and are typically too low for parasitic
characterization.

Parasitic extraction usually requires dedicated instruments to achieve the re-

275

[PAGE 290]
276 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

quired accuracy. The three main choices are the impedance analyzer (IA), vector
network analyzer (VNA), and time-domain reflectometer (TDR). While a source
generator and an oscilloscope can be used together to create a TDR, dedicated TDRs
are available as a single instrument that. achieves much higher performance. The IA
and VNA produce swept frequency results, while the TDR's output is a time-domain
waveform. Through the Fourier transform, time-domain and frequency-domain results are equivalent, so the choice of instrument is to a certain extent a matter of
preference. However, bandwidth limitations and/or time windowing can limit the

opportunities for conversion between domains.

8.1 Measurement Counts

Interconnects typically contain many terminals, so the number of measurements
can become quite large. With a typical one- or two-port laboratory instrument,
one measurement finds one unknown, so filling out an impedance, admittance, or
scattering matrix requires as many measurements as there are matrix entries. For a
nonreciprocal matrix with N terminals, the total number of required measurements
is N?. For a reciprocal matrix, N(N -- 1)/2 measurements are required for the offdiagonal terms, while N are required for the diagonal, so the total is N (N +1)/2. In
some techniques, the diagonal terms are found automatically when measuring the
off-diagonal terms, so the number of measurements for these cases is N (NM -- 1)/2.

Because of the N? dependency for all cases, the number of required measurements can quickly become prohibitive. For example, a 100-lead QFP has 200 ports:
100 outside connections plus 100 inside of the package. A complete characterization to produce a 200 x 200 S-parameter (or impedance, or admittance) matrix
requires 200(201)/2=20,100 measurements. An autoprober can help complete the

measurements in reasonable time.

8.2 Impedance Analyzer

A schematic of an impedance analyzer (IA) is shown in Figure 8.1. A sinusoidal

[PAGE 291]
277

Section 8.2. Impedance Analyzer

Instrument
Shielding

Shorting Coaxial Shielding

(Both Leads)

Measured
Impedance

Figure 8.1. Schematic of an impedance analyzer.

constant-current source I at frequency w drives current through the device under
test (DUT), then a high-input-impedance vector voltmeter measures the voltage
drop. A vector voltmeter measures both magnitude and phase at a given frequency,
so the impedance is Zmeas = V/I. The parasitics are then R = Re{Zmeas| and
L = Im[{Zmeas|/w, with similar expressions using admittance for cases involving
conductance and capacitance.

One of the principal advantages of the IA is its use of a four-probe (or Kelvin
probe) connection to the DUT to eliminate contact resistance. If the current probes
poorly contact the DUT, the added series resistance does not affect the current
because a constant-current source is used. If the voltage probes poorly contact the
DUT, the extra series resistance adds insignificant voltage to the measured voltage
because negligible current flows into the high-impedance voltmeter. Therefore, the
measurement is unaffected by the quality of the contacts, and four-probe setups are

essential for measuring small resistances.

[PAGE 292]
278 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

The upper frequency limit on typical impedance analyzers falls in a range around
IMHz to 15MHz. For the very small parasitics often seen in packaging, sockets.
and connectors, high characterization frequencies are required to obtain sufficient
reactance that can be measured with good accuracy and repeatability. With its
relatively low maximum frequency, the IA often must give way to higher-frequency
instruments such as the VNA or TDR.

Characterization of the impedance matrix of a multiconductor interconnect with
an IA requires two sets of measurements. The diagonal terms can be found by
applying the two leads of the IA between port i and ground with all other ports left

open-circuited. From chapter 4, equation (4.1), the voltage at port i is then
V; = Ziidi,

so the measured impedance is Z;;. The diagonal terms of an N x N impedance
matrix can be found by \ one-port impedance measurements.

For the second set of measurements, the two leads of an IA are applied to ports z
and j, with all other ports left open-circuited. Care must be taken not to accidentally

ground the ports. The voltages at these two ports are
Y= Ziti + Zyl;
and
Vi = 2545 + Z551;.

Because the IA acts as a current source, [; = --I; = Imeas. Furthermore, the mea-

sured voltage is Vineas = V; -- V;, leading to the conclusion that
Vineas = (Li -- 2244; + Z;5)I meas:

where reciprocity is used to set 45; = Zi. The IA measures the impedance Zmeas =

Vineas/Jmeas, SO the off-diagonal impedance matrix element can be found as

4ij =

hoje

(Zig + 43; --_ Zmeas) '

[PAGE 293]
Section 8.3. Wector Network Analyzer 279

Since Z;; and Z;; are known from the first set of diagonal measurements, the offdiagonal elements can be found at the rate of one per measurement.

If an admittance matrix is required, an impedance matrix can be measured and
then inverted. Experimentally, open circuits are far easier to deal with than are the

short circuits that are required when directly measuring multiconductor admittance

matrices.

8.3. Vector Network Analyzer

As frequency increases, the concept of voltage breaks down as uniqueness is lost.
Another concept must be used for characterization of circuits, and traveling waves
work quite well. The vector network analyzer (VNA) is a multiport instrument
operating on the principle of directional traveling waves.

The sinusoidal voltage on a transmission line is a superposition of traveling waves

moving in opposite directions. From chapter 2, equation (2.27), the voltage is
V(z,w) = Vt (we)? 4 Vo (wet Mo),
Similarly from (2.28), the current on the line is

I(z,w) = AG [V* (we -- Vo (w)et*] .

Consider a single-port VNA with an applied load Zz, at z = 0, then

V(0,w
Z1(w) = TOs
VtWw)+V-(w)
V+) -- V-@)
1+T(w)
1--T(w)'

= Z,(w)

= Z,(w) (8.1)

where I'(w) = V~(w)/V+(w) is the frequency-dependent reflection coefficient at
the load. Therefore, the load impedance can be determined if the incident and
reflected wave voltage amplitudes can be found. At sufficiently high frequencies, the

directional waves can be separated with a directional coupler. The performance of

[PAGE 294]
280 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

directional couplers strongly impacts the lower frequency limit and total bandwidth
of network analyzers.
The definition of the reflection coefficient relates the reflected wave to the in-

cident wave as V- =TV7. For a two-port instrument, this can be generalized to

include both ports as

Yr |_|} Su S12 vy (8.2)

Vo_ S21 S22 Vor
The reflected waves are written in terms of the incident waves using the scattering
matrix.
S-parameters can be measured two at a time with a two-port vector network
analyzer. V,* can be forced to zero by matching port 2 internally to the VNA, then
(8.2) simplifies to

Vy =SuVit
and

By measuring V,_, V, and Vi, the S-parameters $$), and $2; can be found. A simple
schematic of a VNA is shown in Figure 8.2, where directional couplers separate the
directional waves. Repeating the measurement by driving port 2 while matching
port 1 yields the remaining two S-parameters. The VNA may have internal switches
to accomplish the alternate driving and matching of ports, but if not, the DUT can
simply be reversed.

Scalar network analyzers do not detect the phase of the S-parameters and are
useful for scalar measurements such as the gain of an amplifier. By avoiding phase
measurements, a substantially less expensive instrument can be produced. For parasitic measurement, it is necessary to measure phase to separate the real and imaginary parts of impedance (to obtain R and L) and admittance (to obtain G and C ),

so scalar network analyzers are not suited to parasitic extraction.

[PAGE 295]
Section 8.3. Vector Network Analyzer 281

Source Matched Load

a
=
°

ss}
)

=|

a

Figure 8.2. Schematic of a two-port VNA configured to measure $; and $91.

The VNA measures all quantities with respect to its built-in system impedance,
Zo, Which is typically 50Q. When the magnitudes of the S-parameters stray too far
from the system impedance, through low reflection or coupling, the VNA cannot
accurately resolve the quantities. How far is too far? It depends on the care taken
in setup and calibration. Reasonable efforts should yield accurate measurements
to about 2,/1000 to Z, * 1000, and very careful setups could yield substantially
more. Note that this range exceeds typical VNA guaranteed specifications by a
wide margin.

The advantages of the VNA include high-frequency operation to bring the reactances of small parasitics into a measurable range, precision calibration with explicit
control of ground reference points, and high signal-to-noise ratio (60-100dB).

The principal disadvantages of the VNA are two-point contact, so contact resistance limits the ability to measure small resistances, and the need for postprocessing
of S-parameter data to yield circuit models consisting of resistors, inductors, capacitors, and transmission lines.

Coupling terms are measured with the IA by bridging two DUT terminals with

[PAGE 296]
282 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

the single port of the instrument. This technique is not possible with the VNA because the ground lead of the probe would short a terminal to ground. Measurements
of coupling terms with the VNA requires two ports on the instrument to enable the
separate probing of each terminal. Fortunately, two-port VNAs are readily constructed. Note that this discussion applies in equal measure to the time-domain

reflectometer, which is discussed in section 8.4.

8.3.1 Calibration

Calibration plays a key role in the use of the VNA and is required at every use to
account for variations in phase and power. Every new setup requires recalibration
so that phase changes induced by cables and fixtures can be subtracted out. This
situation is in sharp contrast to other instruments, such as voltmeters, oscilloscopes,
impedance analyzers, and time-domain reflectometers, which require only periodic
calibration by a calibration service. Success with a VNA requires careful and proper
calibration before every use and as changing setups and conditions warrant.

There are a wide variety of calibration methods, including SOLT (short-openload-through), TRL (through-reflect-load), and LRM (load-reflect-match). The acronym hints at the standards that must be measured to achieve calibration. Depending on the DUT, some calibration methods yield higher accuracy than others,
and while the SOLT method is generally considered to have the lowest accuracy, its
accuracy is still quite adequate for interconnect. characterization, Without extensive efforts, the SOLT is also the easiest to apply. A brief explanation of the SOLT
method follows.

Calibration for a one-port measurement requires the measurement of three standards: a short circuit, an open circuit, and a matched load. The quality of the standards and their applications directly determines the accuracy of the measurement.
All standards have some parasitic values associated with them, and network analyzers allow the incorporation of the values, if known, to improve accuracy. Vendors
of standards will typically provide the parasitic values, and it is important to use

the correct set for a given set of standards.

[PAGE 297]
283

Section 8.3. Vector Network Analyzer

Calibration for a two-port measurement is a two-step process. First, each port
undergoes a one-port calibration. Second, the two ports are connected together with
a through connection to complete the calibration. Additional calibration for leakage
between the ports is also possible but not generally needed for interconnect work.

After calibration, the 5-parameters produced by a VNA reference the points in
the setup at which the calibration standards were applied. Any additional path or
discontinuity to the DUT must be removed by other means. For example, calibration with coaxial standards calibrate the VNA up to the coaxial connectors, while

calibration with a reference probe card calibrates up to the probe tips.

8.3.2 Single Lumped Parasitic Extraction

Capacitance and inductance are straightforward quantities to measure with a VNA.
although a small amount of numerical processing is required. To measure series
resistance and inductance, the DUT is shorted to ground at one end and measured
at the other. Assuming that port 1 is used on a VNA, then from (8.1) the impedance
is

1+ $y;

R+ jul = a

where Z, is the system impedance of the VNA. Equating real and imaginary parts
yields R and L. A similar process yields G and C ; using admittance and an opencircuit sample.

For the measurement of small inductances, a lower frequency limit is implied
by the magnitude of the reactance compared to Z,. Assuming that the system
impedance is 502 and that the VNA is accurate down to 502/1000 = 0.05, then
an inductance of 0.1nH can be accurately resolved for frequencies above 80MHz
(neglecting losses). Better resolution requires higher frequencies, but an upper frequency limit exists where the lumped approximation breaks down. Inductance decreases with frequency due to the skin effect and current crowding, and the appearance of an increasing inductance Signals the breakdown of the lumped approxima-

tion.

[PAGE 298]
284 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

8.3.3. Measurements of Multiport Networks with VNAs

The following three sections provide detail on measuring Z-, Y-, and S-parameter
matrices using a two-port VNA. Two formulations are possible--the diagonal terms
can be measured separately or in conjunction with the off-diagonal terms. Separately
measuring the diagonal terms allows confirmation of good contact of the first port

before landing the second to measure the off-diagonal term.

impedance Matrix

The impedance matrix relates current to voltage according to V = Z T, which can

be expanded as

Vi 44. f12, +++) Zin qh
2) Za, Za. +++) Zon In

= ; Lo, |: (8.3)
VN Zn1 Zn2 °-: ZNN In

For a one-port measurement, if port 2 is driven with the VNA and all other
ports are left unconnected, then j =0V7 #7, and the voltage measured at port 2
is given simply as V; = Z;,;I;. Assuming that port 1 of the VNA is performing the

measurement and that its impedance is Z,, then from (4.6) and (4.7)
1
V Zo(a1 +b) = Zu yn -- by).

Since S$}, = a, then

Zi=2, 1+ Sy

oT Sy (8.4)

For a two-port measurement, assume that port 1 of the VNA drives port i of the
N-port network, that port 2 drives port 7, and that both ports have a characteristic
impedance Z,. When all other ports are open-circuited, their currents vanish, and

from (8.3)
Yio= Zh + Zyl
Vo = 45id, + Zjj12.

[PAGE 299]
Section 8.3. Vector Network Analyzer 285
RECTION O39 ect or eee eee

Applying chapter 4, equation (4.8) to equate this 2 x 2 impedance matrix to the

measured two-port S-parameters yields

(1+ S11)(1 -- S22) + Si2S21

Zi = So (1 -- S11)(1 -- Sze) -- Si2S21
Z, = Z ee)
9 "(1 = Sin) -- S22) -- S12S21
ee pe)
" °(1 -- $11)(1 -- S22) -- Si2S21
Zy; = Zo (1 -- Si, )(1 + S22) + Si2S21 (8.5)

Equation (8.5) can be used alone, so that one two-port measurement provides
all four impedance matrix entries, or just the off-diagonal terms can be used if
the diagonal self terms have already been determined from one-port measurements
using (8.4).

Impedance matrices are very convenient to measure because the unused ports
remain open-circuited. As the two ports of the VNA are moved to map out the full
matrix in a pair-wise sequence, nothing needs to be done to the unused ports before
the measurement is taken. The technique works as long as the small capacitance
and radiation at the open-circuited ports are negligible. Typically, the technique

will be adequate for lower frequencies where data for lumped modeling is taken.

Y-Parameters

The admittance matrix relates voltage to current according to I = YV, which can

be expanded as

ret Yur Yie «> Yin Yi
In Yor Yoo --- Yon Vo

= ae . |e (8.6)
In Yni Yno «-:- Ynn VN

For a one-port measurement, if port i is driven with the VNA and all other

ports are shorted to ground, then V; = 0 Vj #1, and the current measured at port

[PAGE 300]
286 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

i is given simply as /; = Y;;V;. Assuming that port 1 of the VNA is performing the

measurement and that its impedance is Z,, then from chapter 4, equations (4.6)

and (4.7)
1
iF (a, -- 61) = YuV Zola +1).
Since S$); = Bh, then
1-- Shy
Yu = Yo ;
14+ 5),

where Y, = 1/Z, is the system admittance of the VNA.

For a two-port measurement, assume that port 1 of the VNA drives port 2 of the
N-port network, that port 2 drives port 7, and that both ports have a characteristic
impedance of Z,. When all other ports are shorted to ground, their voltages vanish

and from (8.6)

f= Yu, + YijV2

Ig = YyiVi + YjjVe.

Applying (4.8), converted for admittance, to equate this 2 x 2 admittance matrix

to the measured two-port S-parameters yields

-¥y. (1 _ 541)(1 + S22) + $1281

Yui ee Ae ae ea
(1 + $31)(1+ So2) -- S425'
--25}2
Yj, = ¥j--- Pe
(1+ $11)(1+ S22) -- $1282)
Yi --2591

= ¥,------____"*_
(1 + $11)(1 + S22) -- 519821

¥,, = y, (Lt $1)Q = S22) + S12S21
ad mel + Si) + S22) _ S12591_

The technique is valid while the inductance and resistance of the short circuits
are negligible compared to the values within the network. However, the requirement
that all ports of the N-port network not connected to the VNA must be shorted
to ground presents practical drawbacks when implemented experimentally, As the

VNA measurement is moved from one port to another on the network, the short

[PAGE 301]
Section 8.3. Vector Network Analyzer 287

circuits must be repeatedly made and then removed, a process that can be very

time-consuming and can potentially create a wear-out problem if large numbers of

ports are to be characterized.

S-Parameters

Measurement of S-parameters is straightforward mathematically when using a VNA
because the measured quantities are already S-parameters. However, the measure
ment of multiport S-parameters, two ports at a time, requires the tedious mounting
and removal of matched terminations at the extra ports. The S-matrix relates in-

cident and reflected traveling waves according to b = Sa, which can be expanded

as
by Six Sig: Sin a1
ba S21 Seog + San a2
bn Sui Sno --- Swn Gan

For a one-port measurement, if port i is driven with the VNA and all other ports
are matched in the system impedance of the VNA, then a; = 0 V7 #7, and VNA
directly reports Sj; = 6;/ay.

For a two-port measurement, assume that port 1 of the VNA drives port i of the
N-port network, that port 2 drives port 7, and that both ports have a characteristic
impedance of Z,. If all remaining are matched in the system impedance of the VNA,
then a, = 0 Vk #i,7 and

b, = Sia) + S;ja2
bo = Syia1 + Sy;a2. (8.7)

The VNA produces these results directly.

As the measurement ports on the VNA are moved to map out the full S-matrix,
the matched loads must also be moved. Practica] issues involving the load size, wearout from repeated mounting and demounting loads, and time make the measurement,

difficult for large numbers of ports.

[PAGE 302]
288 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

8.3.4 Conversions between Types

Multiport circuits can be described with impedance, admittance, or scattering matrices (and others as well, such as hybrid, transmission, and ABCD parameters).
Conversions between the types are mathematically exact, so in principle, one is not
preferred over another. For example, multiport impedance matrices are easiest to
measure because unused ports are terminated in open circuits, so it is tempting to
measure Z and then to derive Y -- Zz or S with (4.9). However, finite precision
in real data can prevent some conversions due to error accumulation.

Consider the conversion from $ to Z. An N -conductor interconnect plus a port
numbering scheme is depicted in Figure 8.3. At low frequencies, the S-parameters

tend towards

O +1 0 O
+1 0 O O
0 O +1
oO 0 +1 0

call
II
co)

In converting from S to Z using (4.14), the critical term is (7 -- S)-1, where the

inverse must exist before the conversion can be performed. Checking T-S yields

----<----------------

3 4

2N-1 2N

Figure 8.3. N-conductor interconnect with 2N ports.

[PAGE 303]
Section 8.3. Vector Network Analyzer 289

---1 +1 0 0

mf f
|
tall
\\
o Oo
So oS
| +
a
|
+ oe

but the inverse of this matrix does not exist. Similar problems arise if the target is

Y instead of Z. Therefore, small errors in S can lead to large errors in Z or Y.

8.3.5 Smith Chart

The Smith chart is a tool developed by microwave engineers to assist with calculations involving transmission lines, and much insight can be gained through its use.
A rudimentary knowledge of the Smith chart is quite useful since it is used as a
major display mode for VNAs. When calibrating and using a VNA, the Smith chart
provides immediate feedback as to whether the DUT is inductive, capacitive, lossy,
open, or short. Good quality measurements can be facilitated by monitoring the
Smith chart display.

A printed Smith chart looks quite complex as a result of its use in pre-computer
days as a functional computation device, but it is in fact a simple plot of the
reflection coefficient [ on the complex plane. A grid of Z;, values computed with
(8.1) is superimposed onto the plot, enabling the direct, graphical conversion between
IT and Z;.

A complex plane is shown in Figure 8.4a with a superimposed circle of radius 1.
Since |['| > 1 implies an active circuit (more power propagates from the load than
towards it), the unit circle indicates a perfectly reflective, lossless, and passive load.
All points inside the circle indicate passive, lossy, and imperfect reflections with
some power imparted to the load.

In Figure 8.4b, a very simple Smith chart is shown, annotated with important
special cases. The reflection coefficient for a lossy inductive load and real charac-

teristic impedance is

[PAGE 304]
Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

290

Im(T]

Re[T]

Active

(a)

, Yi 7 = 0
W///////
Lo

Capacitive

(b)

Figure 8.4. Reflection coefficients can be plotted on a complex plane: (a) annotated

with rectangular coordinates, (b) overlayed with impedance to form a Smith chart.

r= 41 ~ Zo
ZL + Zo
_ R+ywLl- Z,
~ R+ywLh + Z,
_ (R-Z,)(R+ Z) + (wh)? WwLZ,
(RF ZF +L) -- REZ OLE

With a positive imaginary part and a real part that can be positive or nega-

tive, inductive loads always appear in the top half of the Smith chart. Conversely,

[PAGE 305]
1
Section 8.3. Vector Network Analyzer 29

Figure 8.5. Impedance of a 5 resistor in series with a 10nH inductor plotted on

a Smith chart, with Z, = 50 over the frequency range from 100kHz to 1GHz.

capacitive loads always appear in the bottom half. For a purely resistive load, the
reflection coefficient is always on the real axis.

As an example, the impedance of a load consisting of a 5Q resistor in series with
a 10nH inductor is plotted on a Smith chart in Figure 8.5 for frequencies ranging
from 100kHz to 1GHz. The chart is overlayed with impedance values normalized
to 502. At low frequencies, the reactance of the inductor is negligible, so the plot
starts on the real axis at T = (5 --50)/(5+50) = --0.8182 or, equivalently, 7,/Z,. =
5/50 = 0.1. As frequency increases, inductive reactance increases, pushing the trace
farther into the upper half of the Smith chart.

For a resonant circuit, the trace on the Smith chart will cross over from one half
to the other, as demonstrated in chapter 6, Figure 6.6 for a capacitor in parallel
with a series resistor and inductor; at low frequencies the circuit looks inductive at

its input terminals, but above 1.54GHz the circuit, looks capacitive.

[PAGE 306]
292 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

8.4 Time-Domain Reflectometer

The basic use of a time domain-reflectometer (TDR) is to isolate faults in long runs
of inaccessible cable. The classic example is a buried phone line that has developed
a short or open circuit. The location of the fault can be found by injecting a single
voltage pulse on the line and capturing the reflection on an oscilloscope. The injected
pulse propagates down the line, reflects off the discontinuity, and then returns to
form a pulse on the oscilloscope. The flight time can then be measured from the
trace, and knowing the propagation speed on the cable, the spot to dig can be
computed.

A TDR can be constructed from a pulse generator and an oscilloscope. Purposebuilt instruments offer a single, easier-to-use, and generally higher-performance
package. A simple schematic of a TDR is shown in Figure 8.6. The signal generator injects a source waveform v, with a source impedance matched to the system
impedance to absorb any returning reflections. A high input-impedance oscilloscope
measures the return voltage vu, (plus the injected waveform on its way out}. The
key to using a TDR is in interpreting the reflection result.

Assume that v, is the unit step function and that the transmission line has a
delay of r. After the step is injected, it takes until time 27 before any reflection
can return to be measured at v,. During this time the voltage evenly divides on the
source impedance and transmission line impedance, so the measured voltage at vu,
is 0.5V. After 27 has elapsed, the DUT can begin to be distinguished. An example
simulated TDR trace is shown in Figure 8.7 for a 10nH load. When the initial edge

Figure 8.6. Simple schematic of a time-domain reflectometer (TDR).

[PAGE 307]
293

Section 8.4. Time-Domain Reflectometer

0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Measured Voltage, v,

0.1
0

0 2 4 6 8 10

Figure 8.7. TDR trace using the simple model of Figure 8.6.

hits the inductor, it appears as an open circuit. Voltage doubles on an open circuit.
so the trace moves up towards 1V. The inductor is a short to the low-frequency
components, so as time advances, the inductor looks more and more like a short.
so the voltage moves back towards zero. Note the Ins delay before the TDR "sees"
the inductor, due to the 0.5ns delay of the transmission line.

The advantages of the TDR include intuitive (for many) operation in the timedomain, multiple numbers of ports, and extraction of impedance profiles. The disadvantages include low signal-to-noise ratio (~ 20dB) compared to the VNA, postprocessing for parasitic extraction (although the computation is built into many
TDR. instruments), and shadowing of impedance profile information behind large

reflection coefficients.

8.4.1 Inductance Extraction

A basic setup for the extraction of inductance and mutual inductance using a TDR
with two channels is shown in Figure 8.8. Port 1 drives line 1, while port 2 senses
the voltage generated on line 2. All inductance associated with cables, connectors,

and fixtures are absorbed into LZ; and Ly. The loop equations describing this setup

[PAGE 308]
Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

294

Port 1 V6

Port 2

Figure 8.8. TDR setup for inductance and mutual inductance extraction.

are

diy dig
--~ 7p, yO? 8.8
Url Ty dt + M dt ( )

and

diy diy
ro = M-- + I, --. 8.9
me Mt (8.9)

To find the inductance of line 1, integrate (8.8) to obtain
t

| Uri (t)dr = Lyity (t) + Mia(t). (8.10)

Choose ¢ large enough so that all waveforms are completely settled, then DC conditions prevail and 7; (t) = vo /Z,, where v. is the step voltage of the TDR channel.

and i2(t) = 0. Under these assumptions, (8.10) can be solved for Ly; giving

Z i
i _ vri(t)dr, (8.11)

for large t. The inductance of line 2 can similarly be found by driving line 2 rather

than line 1.

To find the mutual inductance between lines 1 and 2, integrate (8.9) to obtain

f Vra(T)dr = Mix (t) + Lots (£).

[PAGE 309]
295

Section 8.4. Time-Domain Reflectometer

For large t, DC conditions prevail, and i1(¢) = vo/Zo while i2(t) = 0, so solving for

M yields
t
M= = [ vr2(T dr,
Vo Joo

for large t.

To remove the inductances of cables, connectors, and fixtures, a set of measurements are made with a good short-circuit in place of the DUT. These inductances
are subtracted from those found with the DUT in place to isolate the inductances

of the DUT alone. Combining the two measurements into a single pair of formulas

yields
Zz t
I, = = | (r1(T) = Urtonoe (7) aT (8.12)
Vo J --oo
and
VA t
M =f (e427) ~ tye (T)) Ar, (8.13)
0 J--oo

where the subscript "short" means the measurement with the good short-circuit in

place.

8.4.2. Capacitance Extraction

A basic setup for the extraction of capacitance and mutual capacitance using a TDR
with two channels is shown in Figure 8.9. Port 1 drives line 1. while port 2 senses
the voltage generated on line 2. All capacitance associated with cables, connectors,

and fixtures are absorbed into C1, Cz and Cyy. The nodal equations describing this

setup are
Vri Us dUpt du,2
a -- 8 C _ --
ZZ, + (Ci + Cy) ap OM "7° (8.14)
and
Z, 2 M) Ma = 0. (8.15)

[PAGE 310]
Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

296

Port 1 Vg

Port 2

Figure 8.9. TDR setup for capacitance and mutual capacitance extraction.

Integrating (8.14) yields
t
> / (vp (1) -- us(r)) dr + (Cy + Crs) vrilt) --Caurrra(t)=0. (8.16)

For large t, such that the waveforms on both channels are settled, DC conditions
prevail and v,1(t) = vp (the step voltge of the TDR) and v,2(t) = 0. Under these

conditions, (8.16) becomes

Ci + Cy =

/ (us(r) -- vp1(r)) dr. (8.17)

Vo ---oO

Similarly, integrating (8.15) then evaluating for large t yields

1 t
Cu = | Ur2 (T)dr.

Zoo Jaco

So the mutual capacitance is found first, then the capacitance to ground can be
found. Note that, in general, for multiport interconnects, all mutual capacitance
terms must be characterized before the capacitances to ground can be evaluated.

To remove the capacitances of cables, connectors, and fixtures, a set. of opencircuit measurements are made with the DUT removed. These capacitances are
subtracted from those found with the DUT in place to isolate the capacitances of
the DUT alone. Combining the two measurements into a Single pair of formulas
yields

1 t
Lovo [. (Urtopen(T) -- Uri (r)) adr

Cy +Cy =

[PAGE 311]
297

Section 8.4. Time-Domain Reflectometer

and

w= a | * (vp0(t) -- Bed (7)) ar

Lovo oO

Note how the detailed time profile of the source, v,(t)}, drops out since it is assumed

to be the same in both measurements.

8.4.3 Impedance Profile

A TDR can provide estimates of the characteristic impedances and propagation delays of cascades of transmission lines. Assume that the transmission line connecting
the DUT to the TDR has zero length. (Its actual profile can be extracted along

with the transmission lines in the DUT.) If the DUT presents an impedance 7,

then
OS ST + ZL
and solving for Z, yields
Z, = Zo oF (8.18)

The impedance profile is then found by computing Z, from v, at each time point
and plotting Zz vs. time.

Us is needed and can be found in a number of ways. For example, for no load
or transmission line, then v, = v,, or with a very long, matched transmission line,
then v, = 2u,. Practical issues may favor one technique over another. Alternatively,
vs can be approximated by v,, the step voltage magnitude, which approximates the
open circuit voltage.

The simulation in Figure 8.10 demonstrates impedance profile extraction using
Us = Uo. The transmission lines are accurately characterized in terms of impedance
and delay (note the factor of 2 involved due to the round-trip nature of TDR
measurements); however, multiple reflections exist and create the impression that

More structure exists after 4ns than actually exists in reality.

[PAGE 312]
298 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

Impedance, 2

Time, ns

Figure 8.10. TDR trace using the simple model of Figure 8.6 and the impedance

profile extraction formula (8.18).

Each change in characteristic impedance causes the TDR trace to bump up
or down to a new impedance level. Increasing impedance implies increased inductance, decreased capacitance, or both. Conversely, decreasing impedance implies
decreased inductance, increased capacitance, or both. For parasitic extraction, such
as the discontinuity presented by an imperfect coaxial connector, bumps up imply
an inductive parasitic while bumps down imply a capacitive parasitic. These concepts are summarized in Figure 8.11. Note that these relationships are derived in

chapter 2, sections 2.4.3 and 2.4.4.

8.4.4 Layer Peeling

For complex structures, multiple reflections can make it difficult to identify the
correct impedances and delays in an impedance profile. Transmission line theory can
be used to derive a postprocessing extraction algorithm that removes the multiple
reflections. Of the many techniques that have been developed, the one presented
here is called layer peeling.

A lossless interconnect is assumed to consist of a cascade of equal-delay transmis-

sion lines with unknown characteristic impedances as represented in Figure 8.12a.

[PAGE 313]
299

Section 8.4. Time-Domain Reflectometer

Inductive

Impedance

ZL=Zo

Capacitive

Time

Figure 8.11. Basic relationships for impedance discontinuities in TDR traces.

A TDR is used to measure the reflection coefficient at time points 0, 7, 2r. .
Nr. Since TDRs discern structures according to their round trip times, the delay
of each section of transmission line is then 7/2. Because samples are only available
out to time Nv, just N sections of transmission lines can be characterized because
for those farther out, the signal does not have time to return to the TDR.

It is shown in chapter 2, equation (2.16) that the total voltage can be written as
the sum of a forward- and backward-traveling voltage wave, so v(t) = vt (¢)+-u7(t).
For layer peeling, the traveling waves must be tracked at both the left and the right
sides of each transmission line section. For this purpose, a superscript "L" indicates
the left side, while an "R" indicates the right. The transmission lines in Figure 8.12a
are annotated with their traveling waves.

In addition, the traveling waves are time-dependent. In Figure 8.12b, the traveling waves on each section of transmission line are plotted for each time point.
Because it takes time for the TDR pulse to reach further into the interconnect, the

traveling wave amplitudes are zero for earlier time steps at the greater depths. This

[PAGE 314]
300 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

Zo, Zo2 Zo3 ZoN
Input {Ff
viv TR vgh v3R vghov3n YN
-L -R -L RK -L -R yil
vy Vv 1 V5 Vo V3 V3 N

(a)

Depth --$£_---2---__1__---->

Data at TDR

Assume Zo
Compute Zo
Cross Boundary
Propagate
Compute Zo
Cross Boundary
Propagate
Compute Zo
Cross Boundary

Peeling Algorithn. ----------------->

(b)

Figure 8.12. Layer peeling for removing multiple reflections from TDR-generated
impedance profiles: (a) the interconnect is assumed to be a cascade of equal-delay
transmission lines, (b) the traveling waves are moved at all time points from left to

right into the interconnect, allowing the extraction of one characteristic impedance

per step.

[PAGE 315]
301

Section 8.4. Time-Domain Reflectometer

fact is exploited to extract the characteristic impedances of the transmission line
segments.

The peeling algorithm is represented schematically in Figure 8.12b, and it consists of three steps. It is assumed that the left-side traveling waves on transmission
line 7 are known at all time steps and that 7, is known. In step 1, the traveling
waves are propagated across the section of transmission line. Positive-going waves
(left-to-right) transfer their values to the next time step, while negative-going waves
(right-to-left) transfer to the prior time step. In step 2, the characteristic impedance
of the next transmission line segment is computed according to chapter 2, equation (2.40), which can be rearranged to yield

Zoid) = Zt

"lsu, "/ vz i'

This formula must be used at a time step where there is no negative-golng wave in
section i+ 1 (i.e., vj, 4 = 0), and these positions are indicated in Figure 8.12b. In
step 3, the traveling wave amplitudes on the left side of section +1 are computed
from those on the right side of section i according to (2.38) and (2.39). At this
point, the algorithm is back to the starting point and can be repeated N times to
extract the characteristic impedances of N transmission line segments. Since both
forward and backward traveling waves are tracked at all times. multiple reflections
are accounted for and do not show up in the final extracted impedance profile.

To kick off the peeling algorithm, vt" and v~" for each time step as measured
at the TDR is required. Referring to Figure 8.6, assume that the TDR is set to
report voltage (rather than reflection coefficient or impedance), so v, at each time
step is available. A calibration measurement is required to split the total voltage
into its traveling wave components. A measurement with the DUT replaced by a
precision matched load with R = Z, will result in no reflection, so v-/ = 0 and

pth -- rmatched- For subsequent measurements with the DUT in place,

-L
Uv = Ur -- Ur.matched:

The characteristic impedance of the first section of transmission line to be de-

[PAGE 316]
302 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

embedded is assumed to be Z,, and this is reasonable since there is a short section
of transmission line between the sampling circuitry and the probe tips. The full
length of this connection will be extracted along with the DUT.

Layer peeling uses the characteristic impedance of the current transmission line
segment to compute the impedance of the next. Therefore, any error in the current
section is propagated to the next, so errors accumulate as the extraction moves
deeper into the interconnect. Algorithms of this type tend to be sensitive to noise,
and layer peeling is no exception. Commercial-grade implementations of layer peeling must implement a noise control methodology. Robust and general schemes are
not yet available, so ad hoc methods are required. For example, most applications have a limited range of possible impedance values, so the extraction code
can cap the computed values. Also, many applications consist of cascades of constant impedance values, so the extraction code could quash attempts to make small
impedance changes. With a good strategy, peeling can be sufficiently noise-tolerant

to produce a useful extraction tool.

Examples

The following examples are computed using the sample code in Appendix E. Calibration is performed using a matched load. Because layer peeling takes time of
flight into account, the extracted impedance profile reflects the true delay of the
interconnect. In contrast, a simple TDR plot of impedance profiles, as discussed in
section 8.4.3, incorporates a factor of 2 in the delay due to the round-trip nature
of TDR measurements. The sample code adjusts the simple TDR extraction by a
factor of 2 in time to line it up to the peeled response.

The first example is a repeat of the simple transition from 502 to 209 from
Figure 8.10. The original and peeled results are shown in Figure 8.13. The multiple
reflections have been completely removed. Note the change in time scales between
Figures 8.13 and 8.10.

The second example involves a more complex profile that demonstrates the dif-

[PAGE 317]
Section 8.4. Time-Domain Reflectometer 303
60
50
40

30

Profile
100 509 O.5ns
7OQ 0.2 ns
80 30Q O5ns

1209 O2ns
short circuit

Impedance, 2
& 8

ky
i]

Time, ns

Figure 8.14. TDR-based and peeled impedance profiles for a complex profile.

ficulties that multiple reflections can cause. The profile and results are shown in
Figure 8.14, where a simple interpretation of the TDR trace would result in a large
underestimation of the impedance of one section of the profile.

The third example repeats the second with random noise added to the two TDR

signals (matched load and profile extraction). Two results are shown. In F igure 8.15,

[PAGE 318]
304 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

120

0.00001 V Added White Noise
(-100 dB down)

100

80

60

Impedance, 2

so

20

120 0.0001 V Added White Noise

100 Peeled (-80 dB down)

Impedance, Q
nan oo
Qo o

S

20

Figure 8.16. Effects of -80dB of noise on the results in Figure 8.14,

-100dB of white noise is added, while in F igure 8.16, -80dB of noise is added. Both
of these noise levels are quite small, yet both strongly impact the extracted results.
The -100dB results may still be useful, but the -80dB results are not. To be viable,
the extraction must withstand as much as -20dB to -40dB of added noise.

A side benefit, somewhat visible in the examples above, is that layer peeling can

sharpen the extracted impedance edges compared to a TDR trace. For a straight

[PAGE 319]
305

Section 8.4. Time-Domain Reflectometer

TDR profile extraction, the edge rate of the excitation waveform sets the limit on
the resolution of the extraction. In principle, application of the peeling algorithm
results in impedance resolution down to the sampling rate of the TDR, so peeling
would allow the extraction of fine detail from a very slow TDR edge. This could be
very useful for extracting profiles of small structures. However, noise becomes more
problematic as the edge rate slows, so significant sharpening may or may not occur,

depending on the impedance profile.

8.4.5 Resolution

The ability of a TDR to resolve an impedance discontinuity is limited by the rise
time of the TDR pulse that is injected into the DUT. Without peeling, a TDR can
resolve discontinuities with delays equal to or greater than the rise time, a condition

that can be stated mathematically as
tr < TOF.

For longer rise times, the discontinuities smear together. For example, in Figure 8.17
two 0.1ns discontinuities spaced just 0. 1ns apart fail to resolve for rise times greater
than 0.1ns. Also observable in this plot is the error in the impedance of the second
discontinuity due to multiple reflections. With peeling, a TDR can often resolve

discontinuities with delays down to about one-third the rise time.

8.4.6 Multiport TDR Measurements

Since commercial TDR instruments often support several channels with high bandwidth, they are often used to perform crosstalk measurements. A four-channel TDR
can be set up as shown in Figure 8.18 to simultaneously measure impedance on channel 1, delay on channel 4 (with time-domain transmission (TDT)), near-end noise
on channel 2, and far-end noise on channel 3. Since typical TDR channels present a
50Q input impedance, the setup may not match real systems having unterminated
nets. In this case, the TDR measurements are useful for validating circuit. models,

which can then be used to estimate the response of the real system. TDRs pro-

[PAGE 320]
306 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

502 50Q 1502 5021502 50Q
WH HH

wa g™ 0.25ns O.lns O.lns 0.1ns
0

oe ean
i
a 800
g
3 600
&
400
200
0 Se ee
0 02 04 06 O8 1 12 14 16 8 2
Time, ns
(b)

Figure 8.17. SPICE demonstration of the effect of rise time on TDR resolution:
(a) circuit with two short and closely spaced impedance discontinuities, (b} TDR
impedance profiles for several rise times. These unpeeled waveforms are separated

by 200Q offsets.

duce very fast rise times that are much faster than most systems, so the measured
crosstalk is greater than that seen in slower systems.

Two-port TDR systems can replicate the VNA function with the addition of
suitable data processing. Time-domain waveforms can be collected and then transformed to the frequency domain with Fourier or fast Fourier transforms. Calibration
data, such as for SOLT calibration, can be collected to enable error correction. Setups in this mode are referred to as time-domain network analyzers, and a carefully

executed system can achieve S-parameter measurements almost as accurate as mea-

[PAGE 321]
307
Section 8.5. Tradeoffs

Figure 8.18. Multichannel TDR setup for characterizing crosstalk.

surements acquired with an actual VNA.

Two-port TDR systems can also be used to measure even- and odd-mode impedances and delays. If two TDR channels are identically excited in phase, then only
the even mode on a symmetric pair of transmission lines will be excited. Similarly,

the odd mode can be excited if the two TDR channels are identically excited out of

phase,

8.5 Tradeoffs

Since the frequency and time domains are related by the Fourier transform, instrument selection is somewhat a matter of personal preference. However, domain
equivalence requires sufficient bandwidth or time span in the measured data, and
practical considerations may limit the breadth of the data and hamper the ability
to transform domains. Once the data is in the domain in which modeling will take
place, a few basic tradeoffs exist.

The IA and VNA produce frequency-dependent results. Unless the circuit sim-

ulator accepts frequency-dependent component values, and SPICE does not unless

[PAGE 322]
308 Measurement of Parasitics Chapter 8

enhanced to perform convolution, then the modeler is faced with two choices. First,
the data can be processed into a model that the circuit simulator will accept, such
as a ladder network or a rational polynomial function. Second, the data can be
approximated as frequency-independent so that the value at just one frequency can
be used. For example, the skin effect produces frequency-dependent resistance and
inductance. For highest accuracy, a model covering a specified bandwidth can be
constructed. However, the change in inductance is often small, so if the resistance
is negligible, as it often is in interconnects, a good approximation is a frequencyindependent inductance.

A TDR produces parasitic values using an integrated waveform of a specific
shape and edge rate, so the resulting value is shape-dependent. Modeling difficulty
arises when the TDR's edge rate and the application's edge rate do not match.
Since the TDR's edge is almost always much faster than the application's, then
the high-frequency behavior is emphasized in the TDR-derived model. If additional
accuracy is needed, TDR measurements should be taken with the edge slowed to
match that of the application.

A basic tradeoff is established. Frequency-domain instruments produce data
good for any edge rate (limited by the bandwidth of the data), but modeling may be
quite difficult. Time-domain instruments produce data good for one edge rate, but
modeling is trivial. The required accuracy in the models determines the hardness
of these limits.

A second tradeoff involves bandwidth and modeling depth. Since an IA or a
VNA sets up standing waves, the entire structure is excited and can, in principle,
be resolved into a model. For the TDR, high losses or a high reflection coefficient
can effectively shield following structure and limit the depth of the model into the
interconnect. In both cases, the ability to resolve deep and/or hidden structure
is dependent on the signal-to-noise ratio of the instrument and setup. Frequencydomain instruments typically achieve much higher signal-to-noise ratios than timedomain instruments and can be more effective in some cases in resolving structure

deep into an interconnect.

[PAGE 323]
309

Section 8.6. Exercises

8.6 Exercises

1. Develop and describe a technique using the impedance analyzer to measure

general N x N admittance matrices.

2. Demonstrate that the method in section 8.2 produces the correct 2 x 2 capacitance matrix by plugging in the expected values an impedance analyzer

would measure.

3. As suggested in Figure 8.19, a one-port VNA can be modeled as a perfect VNA
that characterizes loads through a two-port interconnect. Using measurements
of short, open and load (SOL) calibration standards, derive the full correction
formula for measuring an unknown load impedance with the effects of the

interconnect removed.

Imperfect VNA

Figure 8.19. Model of a one-port vector network analyzer.

4. (a) Show how an Nx N inductance matrix can be characterized with a TDR.

(b) Show how an N x N capacitance matrix can be characterized with a

TDR.

5. For a single line, derive an inductance extraction formula similar to (8.11) for
the case when a known resistance is in series with the inductor. The resistor

is assumed to be characterized separately with a DC resistance measurement.

6. Set up a SPICE simulation of a TDR based on Figure 8.6 with Z, = 50Q and
a lV 35ps ramp source and a opF capacitor load. Integrate the TDR response

to find the load capacitance using (8.17) for varying lengths of cable, from

[PAGE 324]
310

9,

Measurement of Parasitics Chapter $

very short to very long. What are the effects of long cables on the integration

and on the accuracy of the capacitance extraction?

A lossless 602 transmission line with 0.1ns of time of flight is shorted at one
end. A 502 VNA drives the other end to extract the inductance of the closed
loop.

(a) What is the inductance of the loop?

(b) What is the expected measured value of S,, at 100MHz?

(c) Repeat for an open-circuit measurement for capacitance extraction.

. Set up a SPICE simulation of a TDR based on Figure 8.6 with 4o = 50Q and

a 1V 35ps ramp source, and demonstrate the extraction of the 2x 2 inductance
matrix defined by L; = 10nH, Lo = 9nH, and K = 0.35. What are the effects

of the long cables on the accuracy of the extraction?

Show that (8.5) is true.

[PAGE 325]
Chapter 9

LUMPED MODELING

Lumped modeling is a principal starting point for modeling interconnects, including
multiconductor transmission lines, packages, edge connectors, and sockets. For interconnects that are short compared to wavelength or rise time, the lumped approximation holds, and a single lumped stage is a sufficient model. Otherwise, wideband
models are required (see chapter 10).

Modeling technique can also be used to circumvent difficulties in collecting data.
In packages, the connections to the device are often very finely pitched, with irregular grounds. In addition, plastic encapsulation and lids can limit accessibility. By
developing techniques using more than one sample, probing of the package interior
can be avoided.

Finally, topology can be exploited to avoid frequency-dependent models. In general, an N-port linear and time-invariant network is completely described by a
frequency-dependent N x N impedance matrix, or equivalently, by admittance or
S-parameter matrices. The data can be used directly in circuit simulation to include
the effects of the N-port network. However, time-domain circuit simulators handle
frequency-dependent models with difficulty. In addition, extrapolation and/or interpolation are always required with frequency-dependent data. By fitting the data
to an assumed topology, frequency dependence can often be eliminated or reduced

to negligible levels to produce faster, more stable simulations.

311

[PAGE 326]
312 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

9.1 Transmission Line Introduction

The input impedance of a loaded lossy transmission line is

Zr + Zo tanh(yd) (9.1)

fin = 405 7, tanh(yd) '

repeated here from chapter 2, equation (2.66). There are two unknowns: Z, and 7.
If measurements are taken at both ends of the transmission line, then the reflection
coefficient and the transmission coefficient serve as the two knowns to find the
two unknowns. Therefore, one approach to characterize the transmission line is to
perform measurements at each end.

A second approach relies on the application of known loads at one end with
measurements taken at the other. Since there are two unknowns, measurements
with two different known loads are required. While any two significantly different
loads can be used, open and short circuits are the simplest to implement. For the

short-circuit load, (9.1) simplifies to
Zin = Z, tanh(yd).

The lumped approximation is used to eliminate the tanh function by requiring
yd < 1/2, then tanh(yd) ~ yd. Combining this approximation with the lossy
definitions for Z, and + from (2.26) and (2.21), respectively, yields

Zin = R+juL,

where R = rd and L = éd are the total resistance and inductance of the transmission line. The transmission line is lumped into a single resistance and inductance,
termed lumped elements, and this approximation is good while the frequency is
sufficiently low. As frequency becomes too high, the lumped approximation breaks
down and wideband modeling (see chapter 10) is required. Calculations of bandwidth limitations are covered in section 9.6. For the open-circuit load, let Z, -- oo,
then (9.1) simplifies to

Z
Zin = -----~.,
tanh(yd)

[PAGE 327]
Section 9.2, Multiconductor Modeling with Two Samples 313

Applying the lumped approximation for a lossy line and inverting yields
Yn = G+ jw,

where G = gd and C = cd are the total conductance and capacitance of the line.
The transmission line is completely characterized once R, L, G, and C are found.
The model is good while the lumped approximation holds. Generally, R, L, G, and
C are frequency-dependent.

For example, consider a lossless 1cm-long 1002 transmission line with an effective
dielectric constant of 4. The phase velocity is 3 x 10°/4m/s, so the TOF=0.01/(3 x
10°/V4) = 67ps. From (2.11) and (2.12), the inductance per-unit-length is
670nH/m, while the capacitance per-unit-length is 67pF/m. Multiplying the perunit-length values by lcm, the lumped model of the transmission line is 6.7nH in
series with 0.67pF to ground. For a lossless line, || = wV/€c, so the lumped approximation requires that the frequency be limited by f < 1/(4dVfc) = 3.7GHz.

In summary, under the lumped approximation an interconnect can be characterized either with two measurements on one sample, where access at both ends
is required, or with single measurements on two samples, requiring access only at
one end. With the two-sample technique, measurement of the input impedance of
a shorted sample yields R and L, while measurement of the input admittance of
an open sample yields G and C. Extension of the two-sample approach to multiple

conductors is treated in the next section, followed by a one-sample extension.

9.2 Multiconductor Modeling with Two Samples

'The two-sample process demonstrated in section 9.1 for a single transmission line
can be generalized for multiple conductor interconnects. For bandwidth estimation,
extension of the methodology in section 9.1 to N conductors requires the simultaneous solution of N differential equations, followed by the application of the lumped
approximation to obtain a multiconductor lumped model. This approach is not fea-

sible, so instead, the lumped model is assumed from the start. Unfortunately, an

[PAGE 328]
314 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

explicit derivation of the bandwidth limit of the lumped approximation does not
follow when using an assumed topology; however, the general principle presented in
section 9.1 for the single line can be assumed to hold for each individual line in the
multiline case.

An intuitive topology for an N-conductor point-to-point interconnect is shown
in Figure 9.1, where each conductor is modeled with series resistance and partial
self-inductance and shunt capacitance to ground, and each pair of conductors is
coupled with partial mutual inductance and capacitance. A common return path is
provided.

The model must satisfy Kirchhoff's voltage and currents laws, which for this

circuit are respectively given by

(9.2)

Figure 9.1. Lumped model for a multiconductor interconnect. All of the mutual

inductors and most of the capacitors and conductances are omitted for clarity.

[PAGE 329]
315

Section 9.2, Multiconductor Modeling with Two Samples

and
T4+7° =(G4+ jo0\v". (9.3)

Two samples are used to find (R + jwL) and (G+ juwC).
--R
For the first sample, shorting the right side of the model to ground forces VV. = 0.

so (9.2) and (9.3) simplify to

V" =(R+jwh)I" (9.4)
and

T =-T".

Note that Kirchhoff's current law is automatically satisfied. Equation (9.4) shows
that the shorted sample can be described by the N-port impedance matrix, Vv" =
ZT'. Any measurement or simulation method that can produce the impedance

matrix for a multiport circuit is adequate to find the resistance and inductance

matrix. Given the impedance matrix, then
R = Re(Z) (9.5)
and
L= Im(Z) /w. (9.6)

For the second sample, opening the left. side of the model forces T= 0, so (9.2)

and (9.3) simplify to

and
+R = . ==R
I =(G+ jwO)V". (9.7)

For the open sample, Kirchhoff's voltage law is automatically satisfied. Equation

(9.7) shows that the open sample can be described by the NV ~port admittance matrix,

[PAGE 330]
316 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

T*- YvV", and any method that finds the admittance matrix gives the conductance

and capacitance matrices as

= Re(V)

Ol

and
C = Im(¥)/w.

In summary, two samples can be used to produce a lumped model of a multiconductor interconnect. A sample with short circuits on one side can be characterized
exclusively with measurements or simulations at the terminals on the other side
to find the resistance and inductance matrices. Similar measurements on an open
sample can be used to find the conductance and capacitance matrices. In practice.
the open and short circuits are applied to the same side, while the measurements are
taken from the other. The left/right distinction forced by the lumped model does
not actually matter since the electrical effects are distributed over the interconnect.

A main advantage of the two-sample method is that it is often difficult to access
one side of the interconnect. BG As often have die connections on the top and solder
ball connections on the bottom, so access is convenient only from one side or the
other. QFPs and other encapsulated packages make access to the dieside of the
interconnect difficult due to the encapsulation; access to these interconnects is most
convenient from the outside of the package. By building two samples, access can be
provided where it is convenient to minimize the need for special fixturing.

As discussed in chapter 8, impedance matrices are easier to measure than admittance matrices due to the use of open circuits on unprobed ports. The impedance
matrices of the two samples can be measured and then the admittance matrix for

the capacitance and conductance models can be found through matrix inversion.

9.3. Multiconductor Modeling with One Sample

When all of the ports are accessible, as is often the case in simulation, the complete
lumped model can be obtained from a characterization of one sample at all the

ports. Two formulations exist that lead to 7- and 7-network topologies.

[PAGE 331]
Section 9.3. Multiconductor Modeling with One Sample 317

9.3.1 m2-Network Topology

The z-network topology of a lumped-model interconnect is shown in Figure 9.2.

Kirchhoff's voltage law for this circuit requires that

V --V* = (R+ juL)I, (9.8)

--

where I is an intermediate variable to be eliminated shortly. Kirchhoff's current law

requires that

aa = == ; =L ft

Fo=I+(G +jw )\V (9.9)
and

(9.10)

Figure 9.2. 7-network topology of a lumped-model multiconductor interconnect.
All of the mutual inductors and most of the capacitors and conductances are omitted

for clarity.

[PAGE 332]
318 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

Using (9.8) to eliminate J from (9.9) and (9.10) and assembling into matrix form

yields
T Y +2 -Z a
_ =---1 =k =-1 --R '
T* -Z Y +2 V
=D =f =L --R =F =R = = = .
where Y =G +jwO ,Y =G 4+ jwC ,and Z = R+ jwL. Therefore, given

the admittance matrix of the interconnect, the lumped model can be found by

inspection.

9.3.2 T-Network Topology

The T-network topology of a lumped-model interconnect is shown in Figure 9.3.

Kirchhoff's current law for this circuit requires that
--f, --R = . =
I+ =(G+ jw), (9.11)

where V is an intermediate variable to be eliminated shortly. Kirchhoff's voltage

law requires that

=f, __ =D . --f --i
Vo -V=(R +jwLk JI (9.12)

and

--R -- =R =F
Ve-V=(R + jul I". (9.13)

Using (9.11) to eliminate V from (9.12) and (9.13) and assembling into matrix form

yields

--f, --t ---~1 ---1 <p

V Z+Y Y I |

= R = =-1 =R =-1 _ 5 9.14
V Y Z +¥ *

--

slo =l =b =R =R ER = = =
whereZ =R +jwh ,Z =R +jwlh ,andY =G+4+ jw. Therefore, given the

impedance matrix of the interconnect, the lumped model can be found by inspection.

[PAGE 333]
Section 9.3. Multiconductor Modeling with One Sample 319

L iR
R
i Rt M1 Ry ~ I oR
vi 2 oi 2 Vy
1
L LR
ye Rt Ly vo Pc SG RF > FG oe
vi 2 2 fe) 2 2) V5
L LR
iL RY L3 VT O23 S$ G3 RS 5 I
vy 3 Oo 3 ° V3

Figure 9.3. T-network topology of a lumped-model multiconductor interconnect.
All of the mutual inductors and most of the capacitors and conductances are omitted

for clarity.

9.3.3 Practical Issues

In principle, the complete z- or T-model is available once the 2N-port Y- or Z-
matrices are known for the N-line interconnect. If the interconnect consists of a
precisely 7 or T topology, perhaps constructed directly from lumped components,
then the complete model will be accurately derived.

In actual interconnects, the electrical behavior is distributed in nature, so the
x- and T-networks are approximations. In practice, the complete z- or T-model is
not resolvable with data at a single frequency. For the 7-model, rol and roi are
individually incorrect, but. the sum rom +e accurately represents the total lumped
capacitance of the interconnect. Similarly for the T-model, the sum L + rE is the

total inductance for the interconnect. Similar relationships hold for the resistance

[PAGE 334]
320 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

and conductance matrices. Once these combinations are made, the z- and T-models

form identical L models that, match the one produced with two samples, as outlined

in section 9.2.

9.4 Internal Nodes

Packages targeted for high-performance applications will usually have one or more
planes to reduce inductance. The die will typically make several connections to the
planes for reduced inductance, and for the same reason, several connections from
the package to the system board or socket will also be made. The resulting topology
has a node internal to the package, as shown in Figure 9.4 for a BGA-style package
with three connections to the plane from the die and four to the system.

The topology for internal nodes fits the T° -network. A generalized T-network
is shown in Figure 9.5, where the model is broken into three sections to enable
arbitrary connections. The three sections are reattached with two incidence matrices

that define how the sections come together. The voltages are related according to

and

--b ==b__g

Vi=QV,

=a --b
where the incidence matrices Q@ and@ are constructed by inspection. For example,
in Figure 9.6, three left leads join four right leads at two common nodes, and the

incidence matrices are

1 0
Q=/1 0 (9.15)
0 1

[PAGE 335]
321
Section 9.4. Internal Nodes

Die

Die

Plane

System

Figure 9.4. A BGA-style package inductance model with an internal node.

Figure 9.5. Generalized T-network for modeling of internal nodes. Note that most

mutual terms are omitted for clarity.

[PAGE 336]
322 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

Figure 9.6. Example connections for construction of the incidence matrices Q. in

(9.15) and ran in (9.16).

and

--

(9.16)

ll
--
--- ES) 6hOhUCOON

oOo 2

Assuming there are N "L" branches, M "R" branches, and P internal nodes, then

Q. isan N x P matrix and ral is M x P. For the currents,

r-@)r
and
r=(@)
The voltage drops across the "L" and "R" branches are
V-V=aFt
and
Ro ~b Rip

[PAGE 337]
323

Section 9.4. Internal Nodes

sb = --=L =R =R =R
respectively, where 7 = R +jwh andZ =f + jw . Summing the currents

at the internal nodes yields
=e = > sd
T+P=V¥V,

where Y = G + wl.
oe ue ea eb aed ar =d
Eliminating V',V,V ,Z,andT° yields

where

=i =a=--~ 1 ay T =--a=----I1 --b T

Z+QY (Q') QY (a
--tb----~I1 = T =F -----~1 =6b T
QY (@) Z+QY (@ )

For the case of straight-through connections with no interna] nodes, then N = M =

=a --b
P,@ and@ are N x N identity matrices, and (9.17) simplifies to (9.14).

Nl
|

(9.17)

The incidence matrices are not square, so some manipulation is required to solve
for the lumped matrices given Z. Matrix inversions can be performed after forming

--T
the normal equations from nhonsquare incidence matrices, then (4 A) exists

even when A is not square. If Z is partitioned as

Zu Zio

Za] 20 2
Z21 222

then G and C can be found as

[PAGE 338]
324 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

With these known, then

Re =Re |Z -B (G+ iw) (T')'],
B= ww [Z1-F (E+E) | (S| / a,

7 -- Re Fa -@ (B+ 12) (2) : |

and
=F = =b = = --1 =b r
TL =Im 2. _-- Q (G + jwC) (a } Ww,

The source for Z would likely be an (M + N) x (M + N) S-parameter matrix
produced through either simulation or measurement. With S known, then chapter 4,

equation (4.8) can be used to compute Z.

9.5 Frequency Dependence

The lumped models discussed in this chapter can be constructed from data at a
single frequency. When the model topology is a close fit to the actual interconnect,
the model derived at one frequency accurately reproduces the terminal behavior at
other frequencies over some usable bandwidth. However, if the match is poor, then
the model is accurate only for a narrow band of frequencies centered on the single
frequency from which the model was constructed. The model can be recomputed at
multiple frequencies to extend the fit, but then the model's component values are
frequency-dependent and can require additional modeling to run in a time-domain
simulator such as SPICE.

If frequency-dependence is encountered in a model, a change in topology and a
new model may enable the elimination of the frequency dependence. However, for
any given topology there is the extraction problem to obtain the model component

values from the data. This chapter presents a few lumped models with extraction

[PAGE 339]
Section 9.5. Frequency Dependence 325

methods, but general topologies will usually not have a straightforward extraction
method. A very common approach is optimization, where the component values
are varied until a suitable fit is achieved. While the approach is quite acceptable in
most instances, the model is rarely unique and is often nonphysical. In other words.
it represents a black box that simply reproduces the terminal characteristics. If
the data does not completely cover the bandwidth of the signals to be simulated,
including DC, then care must be taken to ensure that the model extrapolates well.

As a simple example, consider the reactance of a capacitor. If the frequencydependent reactance is fitted at a single frequency with a capacitor model, then the
entire set of data can be regenerated from the model. However, if the reactance is
instead fitted at a single frequency with an inductor model, the model fits the data
only at that frequency. In Figure 9.7, the reactance of a 5pF capacitor is plotted
along with that of an inductor, which can exactly fit the capacitor at one frequency.
A -100nH inductor fits at 225MHz, but at all other frequencies, the inductor does
not fit. The nonphysical negative inductance value is a big hint that there is a

problem with the model.

-100

-200

Reactance, Q

-300

-400

-500 _
0 200 400 600 800 1000

Frequency, MHz

Figure 9.7. An inductor can accurately model a capacitor at only one frequency.

[PAGE 340]
326 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

9.6 Iterative Impedance and Bandwidth

Several modeling options based on 7, 7, and LZ topologies have been discussed so far.
A general discussion of the bandwidth implications of these for the multiconductor
case is very difficult. Instead, the single line case is explored. and it is assumed that
the results are applicable to tae multiple line case. Of the many ways bandwidth
can be studied, iterative impedance offers a particularly convenient framework.

When loaded by an impedance equal to its characteristic impedance (a matched
load), the input impedance of a transmission line is equal to that impedance. For a
lumped model to behave like a transmission line, it must also exhibit this property.
The iterative impedance of a lumped interconnect model is the load impedance
giving rise to an equal input impedance.

The input impedance of the single-section T-network lumped model in Fig-

ure 9.8a is
Zin = jwLh/2+ I (9.18)
in --, 1 . .
jut + jwh /2+Z,
L/2 L/2 L
[~ fc | | 21 [~ C/2 C/2 Zy
Zin (a) Zin (b)
L L
is)
Zin (c) Zin (d)

Figure 9.8. The four possible single-section lumped models for a single lossless

interconnect.

[PAGE 341]
327

Section 9.6. Iterative Impedance and Bandwidth

The iterative impedance, Z;, is defined when 7; = Z,, = Zr, then (9.18) simplifies

Zi = Vz 1- (2). (9.19)

where we = 2//LC. If the T-network models a transmission line, (9.19) shows

to

that at low frequencies, the iterative impedance equals the transmission line characteristic impedance, VLIC. However, as the frequency begins to approach w,, the
iterative impedance starts dropping. For the iterative impedance to stay within 5%
of the low-frequency value, the bandwidth of the model is

62
w< 0.02 (9.20)

VLC

For the a-network in Figure 9.8b, the input impedance is

I

Zn. = --------___--_..

Setting Z; = Zin, = Z,, to find the iterative impedance yields

Jz
44 = Taye nl
_ =)

where again w, = 2/ VLC. As for the ¢-network, at low frequencies the iterative impedance equals the transmission line characteristic impedance JSLIC. As
frequency increases, the iterative impedance also increases. so for the iterative
impedance to stay within 5% of the low-frequency value, the bandwidth is limited
according to (9.20).

For the L-network in Figure 9.8c, the iterative impedance is

L a) Ww

Zia) 5 1-(2) 42 , (9.21)

Ne Mle:

As before, at low frequencies the iterative impedance equals the transmission line
characteristic impedance, ,/f/C, but as frequency increases, the iterative imped-

ance becomes complex with a decreasing real part and increasing imaginary part.

[PAGE 342]
328 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

For the magnitude of the error to be below some small number a, then
w \* w
VG) Hef <=
We We

ay/1-- (1-2)?

<
a VLC

or

For a = 0.05, then

0.1
wo >

TE
Therefore, because of the reactive component to the iterative impedance, the L-
network has about a factor of 3ix reduction in bandwidth coinpared to the T- and
mw-networks.

For the other L-network in Figure 9.8d, the iterative impedance is

-- 2

which has the same error expression and bandwidth criteria as the prior L-network.

The results using iterative impedance show that the z- and 7-networks should

be used whenever maximum bandwidth is required. The bandwidth penalty for
using the LZ-networks is about a factor of six.

For application of these results to compute bandwidth limits for multiconductor
interconnects, single Z and C values are required. For £ it is essential to use an
inductance and not a partial inductance--the L must represent a closed path. The
most sensible choice is the inductance of the loop formed by the longest conductor
returning on ground, where all ground leads are utilized. Because it maximizes C,
the conservative choice for C is to take the longest conductor and assume that
all other leads are grounded; then the C to use is just the diagonal term of the
capacitance matrix.

From (9.20) it can be seen that the bandwidth of a a- or T-lumped model can

be doubled by halving both Z and C. For a transmission line, this can easily be

[PAGE 343]
Section 9.7. Model Reduction 329

achieved by simply halving the length, so a section of length d can be modeled by
two lumped a- or T-sections of length d/2. Such a model is called a multilumped
transmission line model, and any bandwidth requirement can be satisfied for any

line length if enough sections are added. See also chapter 10, section 10.1.2.

9.7 Model Reduction

Interconnect models often have a substantial number of leads, but the model is often
much larger than the needs of a particular simulation. Smaller models enable faster
circuit simulation, so it is advantageous to simplify the interconnect model to incorporate known information. Any manipulations of lumped models must rigorously

account for all mutual terms.

9.7.1 Paraliel Leads

Models often include many leads of the same function, such as ground, and these
can be analytically paralleled together to reduce the size of the model. Leads are
placed in parallel by forcing the voltages at their ports to be equal while satisfying
Kirchhoff's current law. The conversion is derived in chapter 4. section 4.5.2, where
the operation is cast in terms of the admittance matrix. If reducing a capacitance
matrix, the operation in (4.20) can be applied directly. If reducing a resistance
and/or inductance matrix, then the operation must be preceded and followed by

matrix inversions to convert impedance to admittance and back.

9.7.2 Open, Short, and Matched Leads

Leads can be removed from a model by forcing them to be open-circuit, short-circuit.
or terminated. The mathematical operations are given in chapter 4, section 4.5.1.
To summarize, a lead is removed by deleting its row and column from the matrix. If
the matrix is admittance, then the deletion produces a short circuit. Deletion from
an impedance matrix produces an open circuit, and deletion from an S-parameter

matrix terminates the line in the impedance used to normalize the matrix (typically

[PAGE 344]
330 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

50Q). Any of the three operations can be performed on any matrix by converting
the matrix to the correct. type, deleting rows and columns, then converting back.

Resistance/inductance matrices assume that one side of the interconnect is
grounded {to form the closed loop necessary for characterization). Short-circuiting
a lead results in both ends being grounded, so an isolated closed loop is formed that
conducts eddy currents driven by the other leads through mutual inductances. Conversely, open-circuiting a lead leaves one end open and the other shorted to ground,
so it will not support any current and has no inductive effect on the remaining
leads. Recall that when constructing the model netlist, the grounded connections
are ungrounded to construct an open-loop model suitable for interconnect work.

Capacitance matrices assume that one side of the interconnect is open-circuit
(to float the leads for characterization). Open-circuiting a lead through row and
column deletion results in both ends of the lead being open, so the conductor is
floating, but with no static charge. Floating conductors collect charge and affect
the voltages on surrounding leads through mutual capacitance. Short-circuiting a
lead grounds the conductor and eliminates its ability to collect. charge.

Matching the leads provides a termination to ground and can be useful for
building in a driver impedance or termination resistance. The matching value can

be selected by renormalizing the S-parameters using chapter 4, equation (4.15).

9.7.3. Excess Leads

Ideally, an interconnect model is constructed to precisely match the problem at
hand, but sometimes the model is too large because a scaled down simulation is
desired or a previously generated model is being used. For example, suppose a
16-line bus is to be simulated. Even if a 16-line model is specifically generated, a
2-line simulation may be desired for prototype work before scaling up to the larger
simulation. Alternatively, a 32-line model may be available from previous work, but
now just 16 lines are needed. What is a good procedure for reducing the size of the

model to fit the smaller simulation?

[PAGE 345]
Section 9.7. Model Reduction 331

The unused lines will affect the simulation, so the best strategy is to minimize
their impact by terminating them in a way consistent with the simulation. For best
accuracy, the lines can be terminated within the circuit simulation to capture the
interaction between the termination parasitics and the interconnect. In many cases.
ideal terminations can be incorporated directly within the interconnect model to
eliminate unneeded leads for a smaller and faster simulation. Simulation runtime
can be greatly improved with an analytically reduced model.

Different cases require different analytical model reductions. Matched terminations can be used to model both terminations and drivers holding low or high.
Renormalization of the S-paraimeters will often be needed to achieve the proper
impedance. Drivers holding in a high-impedance state and receivers can be mod-

eled as open circuits, although the associated capacitances will be neglected.

9.7.4 Symmetry

Packages and interconnects often have considerable symmetry. For example, QFPs
usually have three-way symmetry, where the entire package can be described from
one-eighth of the layout. When characterizing packages in the laboratory, symmetry
cannot be exploited to reduce the characterization effort. For example, the inductance matrix for a package that is symmetric about a centerline can be partitioned

into three blocks as

== La Lp

b=) ip _
Ly La

If just half of the package is characterized, then La is known but the coupling
between the two sections, given by Lp, is not known. To complete the Matrix, it
would be necessary to extrapolate Lp from the data in La.

In simulation, it is possible to introduce a perfect magnetic conductor (PMC)
symmetry plane that numerically mirrors La into the uncharacterized half. The
key here is that the excitation is also mirrored, so that when one line is driven, its

mirror is also driven. The final matrix consists of just La. which has built in the

[PAGE 346]
332 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

fact that its mirror is driven in tandem, and all coupling is correctly accommodated
for this specialized excitation. If this mirrored excitation fits the modeling needs of
the problem, then mirroring can dramatically reduce the characterization time. Not
all simulators provide PMCs, so if one is not available, then symmetry cannot be

exploited for model simplifications.

9.8 Approaches for Specific Interconnects

The theory developed in the chapter up to this point is sufficient to characterize a
wide variety of interconnects. While an essentially infinite number of variations exist
for characterizing any one interconnect, this section outlines simple approaches for
two common interconnects. The techniques rely on the two-sample approach because

the interiors are difficult to probe.

9.8.1 QFP

The QF'P presents some difficulties in sample preparation. Ideally, two inserts are
fabricated with bondable pad locations for the wirebonds. The first, insert, used
for characterizing inductance and resistance, simply shorts all pads together with
a sheet of good conductor, and an aluminized die is ideal. The second insert, for
capacitance, has all pads isolated; however, this sample is expensive due to the cost
of the custom insert. The insert and wirebonds can be omitted, but then the model
will not incorporate the contribution of the wirebonds to the capacitance. The two
samples are fabricated with the inserts using the regular assembly process.

The samples are mounted over a ground plane at the approximate distance
the part would normally experience. For capacitance, the distance is important
for obtaining the correct capacitance to ground. For inductance, the distance is
important for generating the correct strength of the eddy currents (which lower
inductance) in the ground plane. A setup is suggested in Figure 9.9a. Each lead is
probed with the probe tip on the lead and the probe ground on the ground plane.

The two samples are set up and probed in exactly the same way except that the

[PAGE 347]
Section 9.8. Approaches for Specific Interconnects 333

Coaxial Probe

Insulation

= LIL EOE
Ground Plane

Shorting Contact
(Option 1) Shorting Stud
(Option 2)

(a) QFP

Open
Insert

Shorted
Insert

Coaxial Probe

wz
Ground Plane

Shorting Contact

(b) Edge Connector

Figure 9.9. Suggested setups for characterizing QFP packages, edge connectors,

and similar structures.

[PAGE 348]
334 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

inductance sample requires a connection to the ground plane to complete the loop.
The figure shows two approaches for making this connection for the inductance
characterization.

In the first option, one or more of the leads of the package are shorted to ground.
Since all of the leads are shorted together on the die insert. then a closed loop is
formed by each of the remaining leads through this short to ground. The inductances
of these loops and the mutual inductances between them are then characterized. The
advantage of this option is that the sample needs no further preparation after sample
construction. If the pin assignments of the package are known, it can be convenient
to short all of the ground leads to the ground plane so that no renormalization is
needed after the model is constructed, although the model is not then reusable for
different ground pin assignments.

In the second option, a stud is inserted into the package to short the die insert to
the ground plane. The advantage of this option is that the leads can be characterized
to higher frequencies due to the lower loop inductances resulting from smaller loop
areas. A second advantage is that every lead in the package can be characterized.
so the model can be used for any pin assignment.

Using the setup in Figure 9.9, physical interference between the two coaxial
probes can make characterization of two closely spaced leads difficult. The setup
described below for BGAs can also be used to characterize QF Ps and edge connec-

tors, and that setup minimizes mechanical interference between the probes.

9.8.2. Edge Connectors

Edge connectors can be characterized in the same way as QFPs, except the two
samples are formed by using different inserts. For capacitance measurements, an
insert with all of the pads open-circuited is inserted into the connector with the
connector isolated from the ground plane. It is important to use an insert so that
the dielectric loading of the PCB is included. For inductance, the insert has all of
the pads shorted together, and the connector has one or more pins shorted to the

ground plane to complete the loop.

[PAGE 349]
335

Section 9.8. Approaches for Specific Interconnects

9.8.3 BGA

Sample preparation for wirebonded BGAs proceeds in the same manner as for QF Ps.
For flip-chip BGAs, sample preparation is particularly easy. Rather than use die
inserts, the die site can be left open-circuited for the capacitance sample, while for
the inductance sample, all connections at the die site can be shorted together with
a sheet of good conductor soldered or epoxied (with conductive paste) into place.
Probing of BGA samples will typically be difficult without special hardware
because of the irregular locations of the ground balls. One approach suggested in
Figure 9.10 is to fabricate a printed circuit board with vias connecting landing
pads on one side to probe pads on the other. The probe side has a gridded ground
plane, isolated from each probe pad site, for contact by the probe ground. This
setup enables probe contact to each BGA ball (through the via) while contacting
the ground plane nearby. For the capacitance sample, all probe pads are left opencircuited with respect to the gridded ground plane. For the inductance sample the

loop must be closed, and there are two options. In the first option, one signal lead

Coaxial Probe

Short to
Ground

Gridding for Via Clearance

\

Ground Plane

Figure 9.10. Measurement setup for characterizing a BGA. The short to ground

is needed for inductance/resistance characterization only.

[PAGE 350]
336 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

probe pad is shorted to the gridded ground, while in the second, all of the ground
lead pads are shorted to the gridded ground. The advantages and disadvantages of
each are the same as for the QFP setup.

The setup in Figure 9.10 is convenient for any package, socket, and connector.
Its main drawback is the need for custom PCBs to mount the package. For BGAs,
edge connectors, and sockets on a standard pitch, a single design suffices, but for

QFPs a new card can be required for every characterization.

9.8.4 Internal Nodes

The BGA package in Figure 9.4 has an internal plane connecting several leads to
the die (Path A) and several to the PCB (Path B). With the two-sample approach,
it is not possible to resolve the individual partial inductances in Path A, since they
are shorted together at both ends. Characterization will result in a model similar to
Figure 9.13c, where the partial inductance of Path A is common to the individually
characterized partial inductances of Path B and appears folded into the partial self-

and mutual inductances of Path B.

9.9 General Topology

Prior sections show how an interconnect. topology can be assumed and then fitted to
a data set with a custom extraction methodology. For more complex networks, the
interconnect topologies may be a poor fit, and a general-purpose topology can be
required. Unfortunately, a general topology will usually require frequency-dependent
components.

A circuit topology for implementing arbitrary admittance matrices is derivable
using induction. For a 1x 1 admittance matrix, a single admittance value is sufficient
to implement the matrix. Assume that a network exists to implement an arbitrary
Nx N admittance matrix called Y wy. An additional port can be added to the circuit
by connecting admittances between the new port and all N of the old ports plus an
admittance to ground, then the (N+1) x (N+ 1) circuit in Figure. 9.11 is obtained.

Solving Kirchhoff's current law at each node yields the relations

[PAGE 351]
Section 9.9. General Topology

qy

rp

I3

In

In+1

337

N

¥i(VY -- Vn) + SOV
j=l
N

Yo(V2 -- Vnsi) + So ¥a;Vj
j=l
N

¥3(Vs -- Vivir) + >_ ¥35Vj
j=l

N
Yn (Vn -- Viti) + S° Yn Vj
j=l

N
SS ¥j(Vivar -- V;) + YoVna1.

j=l

Figure 9.11. Augmented N x .N admittance matrix to produce an (N+1})x(N+1)

matrix.

[PAGE 352]
338 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

In matrix form, this result can be rewritten as

i, mi+Yu Yi2 ree Yin --Y¥i Vi

In Yai Ye+ Yor -:: Yon --Y2 V2

In Yn1 Yn2 --- Yh +Ynn --Yn Vn
Ina. -¥, --Yo ree --Ywn YotY¥i+:-:-+Yn Vn.

The new (NV + 1) x (N + 1) admittance matrix is

M4+Yu Yi2 oe Yin --Y
Yai Yo+ Yoo --- Yon --Y2
Yui = : : 3 (9.22)
Yn1 Yn2 ++: Yn+Ynw --Yn
---Yj ---¥Y2 0 ++ --Yn YotYit---+¥n

Each new entry in the (N + 1)th row and column includes a new and arbitrary
admittance. Therefore, the new matrix can represent an arbitrary (N +1) x (N +1)
admittance matrix as long as the N x N admittance matrix is also general. Since
the process can start with the arbitrary 1 x 1 matrix, a general admittance matrix
of any size can be built up by successively adding one port.

For any N x N admittance matrix, a circuit representation is constructed by
tying each port to every other port, and to ground, with an admittance. The value of
the admittance between port i and port 7 is just ~Y;,;. The value of the admittance
from port i to ground is just ae Y,;. Note the similarity to the implementation
of the capacitance matrix.

As an example, consider the construction of a 2 x 2 network starting with the
1 x 1 in Figure 9.12a. Adding a second port yields the circuit in Figure 9.12b by
connecting the second port to the first with the admittance Yo and to ground with
Y3. From (9.22), the new admittance matrix is the old with Y2 added to Yj,, and

new elements Yj2 = Yo) = --Y2 and Yoo = Y2+Y3. The resulting admittance matrix

[PAGE 353]
Section 9.10. Multidrop Nets 339

11

(a) (b)

Figure 9.12. Construction of a 2 x 2 admittance network (a m-network) from a

1 x 1 network.

is
Yo+YVii --Y2
--¥2 Yo+ ¥3

Y=

This result is derived differently in problem 13 of chapter 4.

9.10 Multidrop Nets

Multidrop nets connect together several points in a circuit. For example, in F igure 9.13a, four nodes in a circuit, are connected together with a three-drop net.
where one node is considered to be the input. Assuming that the lumped approximation holds for the net, an intuitive approach models each segment with a resistor and inductor to achieve the schematic in Figure 9.13b. However, the model's
component values are not obvious from a multiport S-parameter (or equivalent)
data set. An extraction strategy is needed, and optimization is often used. Alternatively, a general frequency-dependent model using the technique in section 9.9 can
be constructed, but frequency-dependent models can be difficult to implement in
time-domain simulators.

Or, an equivalent model can be extracted using the theory in section 9.2 to obtain
a frequency-independent model (within limits) with a straightforward extraction

methodology. By grounding node 1, the assumed input port, a three-port impedance

[PAGE 354]
Ore

L2

R

| :
3
Lj
RB 13
3 0 '
4 Inductance .
R4 Motual Inductance Resistance Transresistance
L4
( () ()

Figure 9.13, Multidrop net and modeling approaches: (a) a four-terminal, three-drop net, (b) intuitive model by sections,

(c} model using a lumped extraction methodology.

[PAGE 355]
341

Section 9.11. Exercises

matrix characterization yields a three-conductor resistive/inductive impedance model, similar to that in Figure 9.1, through the application of (9.5) and (9.6). By
tying the ends of the interconnects together at node 1, the model in Figure 9.13c is
obtained.

Planes often have multiple contact points, as shown in Figure 9.4, that can be
treated as internal nodes. Planes can also be viewed as multidrop nets and modeled
as such. Given the heavier mathematical load with internal node modeling (see

section 9.4), multidrop net models for planes are simpler to produce.

9.11 Exercises

1. A five-lead interconnect with a common grounded return is shorted to ground
at the far end. Port 1 of a 502 VNA is applied at the near end between lead 3
and ground, while port 2 is applied between lead 5 and ground. All other leads

remain open. At JOOMHz, the measured S-parameters are

--0.98697 + 30.124425 0.00682198 + 90.0492758
0.00682198 + 30.0492758 --0.981598 + 70.148791

S=

Find and sketch a lumped model for these two leads.
2. (a) Without using vector notation shortcuts, write the mesh analyses equations for the three-conductor interconnect in Figure 9.14.
(b) Rearrange the equations and show how the results are equivalent to (9.2).
3. (a) Without using vector notation shortcuts, write the nodal analyses equations for the three-conductor interconnect in Figure 9.15.
(b) Rearrange the equations and show how the results are equivalent to (9.3).
4. A lossless 1502 transmission line with 0.1ns of delay is to be modeled with

a m-network. Derive and sketch the circuit. Over what bandwidth can this

model be used? What is the fastest rise time that the model supports?

[PAGE 356]
342 Lumped Modeling Chapter 9

Figure 9.14. A three-conductor interconnect lumped model with resistance and

inductance, for problem 2.

Figure 9.15. A three-conductor interconnect lumped model with capacitance, for

problem 3.

5. For a lossless 600 transmission line with eg = 4, what is the longest section
that can be modeled with a single T- or x-model for signals with edge rates

down to 2ns?

6. For a lossless transmission line, the lumped approximation requires that
tan(@d) ~ Gd, where G = wV£c. Define the error in the approximation as
€ = (8d--tan(@d))/ tan(@d), then what is the allowed bandwidth for le] < 5%?

How does the result compare to (9.20)?

7. Apply the iterative impedance concept directly to the input impedance of a

[PAGE 357]
Section 9.11. Exercises 343

transmission line given by (2.66) in chapter 2. What happens, and what does

the result mean?
8. A branched network is shown in Figure 9.16.

(a) Use the two-sample method to find a 2 x 2 inductance matrix and a

capacitor value that describe the network.

(b) Sketch a model for the circuit using the topology of Figure 9.1.

Figure 9.16. A branched network, for problem 8.

[PAGE 359]
Chapter 10

WIDEBAND MODELING

Single lumped models with fixed component values are usable over a very broad
bandwidth, from DC to an upper frequency limit where the lumped approximation
breaks down. To capture high-frequency detail, including skin effects and propagation delays, more complex models are required. Enhanced models that exceed the
frequency range of fixed-value single lumped models are termed wideband models.
Transmission lines are describable in precise mathematical terms, so several specialized wideband techniques are available for them, including multilumped models
and modal decompositions.

General networks described by multiport frequency-dependent data can be implemented using a variety of techniques. A frequency-dependent circuit can be extracted from the network's admittance matrix, but many simulators do not work
well, if at all, with frequency-dependent components. Alternatively, a ladder network with frequency-independent components can be synthesized after fitting the
data with a rational function approximation. Or, a circuit topology can be guessed
and then fitted to the data either manually or semiautomatically.

Failure to include sufficient bandwidth in interconnect models can lead to serious defects in simulation results. Timing can be affected by inaccurate delay. Noise
margins can be exceeded due to excessive overshoot, undershoot, and ringing. Lack
of frequency-dependent losses can cause edge rates that are too fast, leading to overestimations of crosstalk and simultaneous switching noise. Lack of high-frequency

losses can also lead to nonphysical, high-frequency oscillations in the simulation.

345

[PAGE 360]
346 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

10.1 Transmission Line Lumped Modeling

Because of the uniformity along its length, transmission line lumped models can
be subdivided into sections to increase bandwidth. While most simulators include
a transmission line model, lumped models of transmission lines can speed up simulations and reduce convergence problems. Many interconnects form approximate
transmission lines where lumped modeling can be very useful. Bandwidth issues for

transmission lines provides good insight for many interconnects.

10.1.1 Limits of Lumped Modeling

Lumped models are usable only up to a maximum frequency where the lumped approximation fails. In chapter 9, section 9.6 it is shown that the maximum frequency

for lumped z- and T-models for less than 5% error is (repeated here from (9.20))

0.62
Ww <= (10.1)

VLC

Assuming that fmax = 1/t,, where t, is the shortest edge rate in the digit.al signal,
then (10.1) implies that

t, > 10VLC. (10.2)

Any simulation with the model must restrict all signals traversing the lumped model
to edge rates greater than or equal to this value. If the - or T'-model represents an
actual transmission line, then the delay (time of flight) of the transmission line is
ta = VEC and (10.2) yields

tr > 10tg. (10.3)
Alternatively, since d = Upta, then
d
tr > 10--, (10.4)
Up

where vp is the phase velocity of the transmission line. The two inequalities in (10.1)
and (10.3) provide limits on the model computed in either the frequency or time
domains. Both state that the rise/fall time must be long compared to the time of

flight of the transmission line for the lumped model to be valid.

[PAGE 361]
Section 10.1. Transmission Line Lumped Modeling 347

10.1.2 Multilumped Models

Lumped models can be cascaded to create wide bandwidth interconnect models. Ifa
line is two times too long for a lumped model, then simply cut it in half and model
the two parts separately. Because each section is half the length of the original,
the bandwidth is doubled. This process can be extended to provide the needed
bandwidth for an interconnect of any length. However, large numbers of lumped
sections can lead to slow runtimes.

As an example, consider a 15cm-long transmission line with an effective dielectric
constant of 4 that will need to support signals with an edge rate as fast as Ins. The
phase velocity is 3 x 10°//4m/s, so (10.4) provides that 107° > 10d/1.5 x 10%,
or d < 1.5cm. Since the line needs to be 15cm long, then a cascade of 10 m- or
T-models is required. The effects of humping for this example are clearly visible in
Figure 10.1, where different levels of lumping are compared to the full transmission

line simulation using the SPICE transmission line model. The results using the

single lumped
3-section lumped ~~~
10-section lumped ~~ ~
transmission line --_

Voltage at Load, V

0 2 4 6 8 10) 12 14 16 18 20

Time, ns

Figure 10.1. Simulation of a transmission line with a multilumped model can be

very accurate,

[PAGE 362]
348 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

multilumped model with 10 lumps is almost indistinguishable from that using the
transmission line model.

Transmission line models can sometimes cause convergence problems and/or
slow runtimes. In these cases, simulation performance can be improved, sometimes

dramatically, by replacing the transmission line model with a multilumped model.

Time-Domain Reflectometry

Time-domain reflectometry (TDR) offers a convenient method to obtain multilumped models under certain circumstances. When losses are low and coupling
is minimal, a TDR can provide information on the impedance and total delay of
sections of an interconnect. Using impedance profile extraction (chapter 8, section 8.4.3) or layer peeling (chapter 8, section 8.4.4), an accurate wideband multi-

lumped model of an interconnect can be constructed.

2D Simulation of 3D Structures

Long interconnects routed on an orthogonal grid (Manhattan routing) over unbroken ground planes can be accurately modeled using two-dimensional decomposition.
As suggested in Figure 10.2, the structure is sliced to produce short interconnects
that satisfy (10.2) or a similar limit. Each slice is then simulated with a 2D electromagnetic simulator to find the inductance, capacitance, and resistance matrices
per-unit-length for all of the conductors. The results from the slices are cascaded
to produce a model of the whole interconnect structure.

Many commercial simulators are based on this technique, and they are very
accurate as long as the underlying assumptions are satisfied. Compared to full 3D
simulation, the technique is very fast and can solve very large problems. Full-scale

printed circuit boards are easily accommodated.

10.2 Coupled Transmission Lines

Coupled transmission lines often occur in bus structures and areas of high wiring

congestion. Because of the strong crosstalk, accurate simulation requires a model

[PAGE 363]
349

Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Lines

Slice 3

Slice ]

Slice 2

Figure 10.2. A section of orthogonal routing can be sectioned to enable charac-

terization by repeated 2D analyses.

of the full coupled structure. Multilumped models can be used, but the mathematics of coupled transmission lines enable an elegant solution based on modal
decomposition, with powerful applications in modeling and theory. The equations
of coupled transmission lines are derived first, followed by a derivation of the modal

decomposition and then some applications.

10.2.1 Telegrapher Equations

Consider the lumped L-network in Figure 10.3. Note that this figure is very similar
to Figure 9.1 in chapter 9, except that the currents i* are reversed to facilitate

cascading multiple sections. Kirchhoff's voltage law requires

= 1 =i"
aR _ =L pr _F
--- vw' =-Ri ---L--_,
at
while Kirchhoff's current law requires
_ _onR
i -- i" = -Gor_ oF

[PAGE 364]
350

Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

Z+AZ

Figure 10.3. A differential section of a multiconductor transmission line suitable for

cascading. Ail of the mutual inductors and most of the capacitors and conductances

are omitted for clarity.

Divide through each by the length of the segment, Az, to obtain

and

Beg Ro OTT OG"

Az Az ~ Az Ot?

Az Az® Az Ot

Let Az -- 0 to shrink the segment to an infinitesimal length to obtain

and

OF => =H
an ti eS, (10.5)
Oi - OU
Be 7 90 Es, (10.6)

[PAGE 365]
351

Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Lines

where 7, Z, 9, and @ are the per-unit-length resistance, inductance, conductance,
and capacitance matrices, respectively. Equations (10.5) and (10.6) are collectively
called the telegrapher equations. By incorporating the telegrapher equations directly
into the simulator, simulation times of long transmission lines can be significantly
reduced compared to multilumped models.

The most common transmission line model in SPICE-like simulators is a single
line with frequency-independent per-unit-length matrices. Therefore, skin effects
and crosstalk cannot be modeled. In many circumstances, the dominant electrical
effects are provided by the impedance and delay of the transmission line, so this
implementation of the telegrapher equations is still quite useful.

More complex implementations of the telegrapher equations are the focus of
ongoing research projects, and many viable formulations have been proposed. As
time goes by, the transmission line capabilities built into circuit simulators will
advance. One of the mature techniques for simulating multiconductor interconnects

is modal decomposition.

10.2.2 Moda! Decomposition

In chapter 5, section 5.8, modal decomposition of inductance matrices is used to
replace the full and dense N x N inductance matrix with N linearly independent circuits. The terminal voltages and currents are broken into components corresponding
to the modes of the inductance matrix (the eigenvectors). The circuit behavior of
each mode is computed separately using the modal inductances (the eigenvalues),
and the results of all the modes are recombined to obtain the complete circuit behavior. With a modal decomposition, the effect of the mutual inductances is completely
simulated while not actually using @ mutual inductance circuit element.

The same approach can be used to solve the telegrapher equations. The perunit-length inductance and capacitance matrices are processed to produce a modal
decomposition. Each mode represents a single isolated transmission line that is an-

alyzed separately. The overall response of the coupled lines is then the recombined

[PAGE 366]
352 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

modal results. With a modal decomposition, the circuit response is based on simulations using single uncoupled transmission lines, and it is not necessary to implement
a transmission line solver to cover the general N-line coupled case; the single-line
solver can just be reused. In total, N conductors plus a common return path leads
to N eigenvalues, N modes, and N decoupled transmission lines.
Consider the loss-free case with 7 = 9 = 0. Eliminating 7 between (10.5) and

(10.6) yields the voltage wave equation

PU =.0°0

aa = feta. (10.7)
The product @é forms a new square matrix that is not symmetric even though é

and @ are symmetric. However, £2 can still be diagonalized as

_ = ==-!1
@=TyVAT, , (10.8)

esl

where \ contains the eigenvalues of Zz, and Ty is constructed as in chapter 5,
equation (5.57), using the eigenvectors of 22. Note that (5.58) does not hold because
a=. . . . . =I
€¢ is not symmetric. Substituting (10.8) into (10.7) and multiplying through by T Vv

yields
=~! =-1
&T, u _ =PT, D
Oz2 Or
Defining the modal voltages as
-- -- sa
Um = Ty %, (10.9)
then
tn =O°Tm

which are decoupled since 0 is diagonal.
If v is eliminated between (10.5) and (10.6) instead of 7, then a current wave

equation is found as

[PAGE 367]
353

Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Lines

Note that @ and @ are reversed compared to (10.7). The matrix products ## and 02
have the same eigenvalues but not the same cigenvectors. This follows since 3 matrix
and its transpose have the same determinant, i.e., ra = [A], and (e)T =€@ =6
since @ and @ are symmetric.
The modal currents are then defined as
im =Tr i (10.11)

where Ty is constructed from the eigenvectors of ¢ é. The wave equation for each
modal current is then

om = yom (10.12)
where 2 is shared with (10.10) and

=i

=TAT, . (10.13)

oll
eli

Since is diagonal, (10.10) and (10.12) are decoupled. Rather than solve one
N x N multiconductor transmission line problem, the modal decomposition allows
the simultaneous solution of N single transmission line problems.

Single transmission lines are characterized by their characteristic impedance,
4o, and their total delay, tg = d/ Up, Where d is the line length and Up is the phase
velocity or speed of light on the line. So far, it has been shown that multiconductor
transmission lines can be decomposed into decoupled single transmission lines that
each propagate a single mode. It is now time to find the characteristic impedances
and delays for the decoupled transmission lines.

Using (10.9) and (10.11) to replace the voltages and currents in the telegrapher
equations given by (10.5) and (10.6) (with F = 9 = 0) yields

Um =-l== Gi,

ae -- Fv PT Ge (10.14)
and

On =-l=> OD mp,

or =7T ely a. (10.15)

[PAGE 368]
354 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

Define new modal inductance and capacitance matrices as
= =-i==
lm =Ty OT] (10.16)

and

1

m=T, €Ty. (10.17)

oll

If ban and Cm are diagonal, then the needed single transmission line parameters are

available by inspection.

From (10.8),

=-1l=_ =

II
il

=-1

== =-1l=
= Ty €T,T, éTy

all

= bn m-

A similar manipulation on (10.13) yields \ = Zp ln:
Eliminating bin yields

oll

oll
>

™m m+

Since matrices commute only when both are diagonal, ¢,,, must be diagonal (X is
already known to be diagonal). From a similar derivation, Lan can also be shown to
be diagonal. Substituting the diagonal modal inductance and capacitance matrices

into (10.14) and (10.15) leads to

Om Om; .
el ---- = 1 a soe
Oz ™m? at ; 3 5) NV,
and
az -- "mia? J =1,2,---,N.

These two equations are exactly the same as in chapter 2, (2.5) and (2.6), except
that the voltage, current, inductance, and capacitance apply to modal quantities.

The characteristic impedance of the jth modal transmission line is Zo = Vm; /Cmj;

[PAGE 369]
355

Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Lines

and its phase velocity is vp = 1/ Sbinj emg . The length of each modal transmission
line is just that of the multiconductor transmission line.

A sign ambiguity exists in Ty and Ty. Eigenvalue problems solve the equation
Az = XZ. For any solution A; with its matching eigenvector £;, the vector ---Z; is
also a solution. When the eigenvectors are assembled into Ty and Tr, these sign
ambiguities can cause decomposition into nonphysical modes represented by negative modal inductances and capacitances on the diagonals of (10.16) and (10.17).
The sign ambiguities can be corrected by computing Lan and forcing all terms to be
positive. Keeping the original Ty and , a corrected version of Ty can be computed

from (10.16) as
= == =-l
Ty =(Tré,, -
The corrected é,, can then be computed from (10.17) using the original Ty and Z.

Homogeneous Materials

If all of the electric field lines see only a single dielectric, then the phase velocities

of all of the modes are equal to

where e,. is the dielectric constant of the material and c, = 3 x 10°m/s (speed of
light in free space). In this case, \ is known because all diagonal terms equal 1/ vs,

then (10.8) simplifies as

--1
Ty

eH
ol
I
pl
|

V

=-1

Ty Ty

If @ is known, then

é=--t . (10.18)

[PAGE 370]
356 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

Similarly, € can be found from z. Therefore, the computational load can be halved by
computing only one matrix then using matrix inversion to find the other. Often the
trick is to compute inductance from capacitance, but since partial inductance formulas are readily available, analytical modeling can often go the other way. However,
the underlying assumption of (10.18) is that there are no losses, so the inductance

must not include internal inductance.

Manual Implementation

While a hard-coded implementation provides the best performance, multiconductor transmission lines can be manually implemented in any circuit simulator. The
voltages and currents at each end of the multiconductor transmission line are trapsformed into the modal voltages and currents, which are then propagated on decoupled transmission lines. It is assumed that the per-unit-length inductance and
capacitance matrices are known.

Two eigenvalue problems must be solved. The eigenvectors of 0Z are computed,
orthogonalized and normalized through application of the Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization process. The eigenvectors are then assembled to form Ty. The process
is repeated for ee, and Tr is formed. With Ty and Ti known, the parameters of the
decoupled lines, bin and €,, are computed. Additional calculations may be required
to eliminate sign ambiguities.

For an N-conductor transmission line (not counting the return path), there are
N decoupled modal transmission lines in a modal decomposition. The voltages and
currents at each end where the multiconductor transmission line attaches to the
circuit must be coupled to the ends of the modal transmission lines. The approach
described here takes the currents to the multiconductor transmission line and transforms them to modal currents, which are then applied as sources to the modal transmussion lines. The modal voltages on these modal current sources are transformed
to voltages and applied back to the circuit as sources where the multiconductor

transmission line attaches.

[PAGE 371]
357

Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Lines

An N-conductor transmission line is sketched in Figure 10.4. A circuit to model
a multiconductor transmission line is shown in Figure 10.5. The two ends of the
multiconductor transmission line are treated identically. For terminals 1 to N, the
terminal voltages are computed from (10.9) using the modal voltages v,,, through
UmN taken from the modal transmission lines. N sources are required for each
terminal and are connected in series to allow the circuit simwator to perform the
summation. The terminal currents 7; through i, are detected and used to construct
the modal currents ¢,,; through imy using (10.11). N sources are applied across
each modal transmission line, where again the simulator performs the summation.
For terminals (N +1) to 2N, the same transformations are applied with appropriate

modifications.

10.2.3. Modal Decomposition Examples

Modal decomposition offers a rich framework for examining signal integrity questions in detail. A numerical example is followed by two analytical examples. Additional analytical work appears in chapter 11, section 11.3 on the subject of multi-

conductor termination.

Five-Conductor Transmission Line

A five-conductor multiconductor transmission line is shown in Figure 10.6. The inductance matrix in nH /m computed from a magnetostatic finite-element simulation

is

371.0 83.12 28.27 12.49 6.575
83.12 367.8 82.14 27.98 12.48
28.27 82.14 367.7 82.16 28.26 ;
12.49 27.98 82.16 368.0 83.13
6.575 12.48 28.26 83.13 371.9

asl

[PAGE 372]
358 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

N+1 N+2 N+4+3

W'S

Figure 10.4. Representative N-conductor transmission line with two sets of N

terminals.

+ + ta
Vl Zol Ypl e b D vas N+]

i

+
APE. fae

o--0d loool

+ ° 0 +4
os eee et i :

lo. ott

Figure 10.5. Modal decomposition using decoupled transmission lines to model an

éV-conductor transmission line.

[PAGE 373]
Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Lines 359
Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Tings

ee
a ee ESS EE
€,=4 0.1mm|

Figure 10.6. Cross section of a five-conductor multiconductor transmission line.

All conductors have zero resistivity and all dielectrics are lossless.

while the capacitance matrix in pF'/m from an electrostatic finite-element simulation
is
83.61 ---10.33 ---0.7328 --0.2872 --0.1612
--10.33 85.24 --10.21 --0.6915 --0.2867
€= | -0.7328 -10.21 85.27 -10.20 -0.7307
--0.2872 --0.6915 ---10.20 85.23 --10.34
--0.1612 --0.2867 ---0.7307 --10.34 83.67

The program in Appendix D takes this data and produces SPICE subcircuit models,
also in the Appendix, that implement both a modal decomposition and a brute-force
multilumped model. The multilumped model is lumped to accommodate edge rates
down to 1ns. Both subcircuits are used in the test circuit, in Figure 10.7 to compute
near-end and far-end noise for an actively switching line and a quiet line. For the
near-end waveforms, the computed results with 2ns edge rates on the voltage sources
are shown in Figure 10.8, while the far-end waveforms are shown in Figure 10.9. In
both cases the two models agree quite closely. By dropping the edge rates on the
voltage sources down to 0.2ns, the lumped model no longer has sufficient bandwidth.
The near-end waveforms for this case are shown in Figure 10.10, where ringing is
observable on waveforms simulated using the lumped model. In this example, the
lumped model does not introduce gross errors; however, the ringing does obscure
some detail, leading to less dramatic depiction of pulse reflection and capacitive

charging.

[PAGE 374]
360 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

50 2 7
: 6pF
"502 7
rmru T opF
50.2 ~
mou + 6pF

Figure 10.7. Schematic for simulations with the five-conductor transmission line

models.

Even and Odd Modes

Consider a two-conductor transmission line composed of identical single lines that
are close enough together to couple. Since the physical structure is symmetric, the

inductance and capacitance matrices are symmetric, too. Writing

= £ ™m
é=
m €&
and
c --Cm

oll
il

[PAGE 375]
Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Lines 361
Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission bines

Line 1

modal -----
lumped

Line 3

modal ~~~
lumped -- -

Voltage, V

Figure 10.8. Waveforms at the inputs of lines 1 and 3 comparing SPICE simula-

tions using modal decomposition and multilumped modeling.

modal - ~ -
lumped -- -

Voltage, V

Time, ns

Figure 10.9. Waveforms at the outputs of lines 1 and 3 comparing SPICE simula-

tions using modal decomposition and multilumped modeling.

[PAGE 376]
362 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

Lumped = Modal

Voltage, V

= _
Ow -- lb we

-0.5

Time, ns

Figure 10.10. Waveforms at the inputs of lines | and 3 with insufficient bandwidth
for the multilumped model. The ringing in the simulation using the lumped model
is caused by a 0.2ns edge rate signal being driven into a model designed for edge

rates down to lLns.

then the eigenvalue problems for 22 and 2 yield

8 ae
Ty =-T = va ve (10.19)
v2 v2
Note that
--1 =I] +.
Ty =T; = v? ve (10.20)
v2 V2
From (10.9), the modal voltages are
1 4 v
im = v2 V2 1
1 4
v2 VB °°
ug+vy
= we ; (10.21)

[PAGE 377]
363

Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Lines

Plane of Symmetry Plane of Symmetry
! !

bo

(a) even mode (b} odd mode

tT]

Figure 10.11. Example of mode excitation for symmetric coupled microstrip lines.

where vy and v2 are the voltages driving lines 1 and 2, respectively. Two special
cases are immediately apparent. If vj = ve, then vm2 = 0, and only the first modal
transmission line is excited. This case is depicted in Figure 10.1la, where the excitation is symmetric with respect to the plane of symmetry for these identical lines.
Because the excitation is symmetric, the first mode is called the even mode. Similarly, if vy; = --ve, then vm, = 0, and only the second modal transmission line is
excited. As sketched in Figure 10.11b, the driving voltages in this case are antisymmetric, so the second mode is called the odd mode. If the coupled pair of lines are
driven with any other voltages, then both the even and odd modes are excited.

The plane of symmetry can be exploited to compute even- and odd-mode phase
velocities and impedances. For the even mode, the tangential magnetic field is zero
on the plane of symmetry. A perfect magnetic conductor (PMC) boundary placed at
the plane of symmetry can enforce a vanishing tangential magnetic field to enable
the computation of the properties of the even mode. Similarly, a perfect electric
conductor (PEC) can enforce a vanishing tangential electric field to facilitate computations for the odd mode. In addition to delineating the modes, the PMC and
PEC boundaries cut the computational domain in half for substantial reduction in
computation time and resources.

The modal inductance and capacitance matrices can be found using (10.16) and
(10.17) to obtain

+m 0
0 €--m

$"
I

(10.22)

[PAGE 378]
364 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

and

-- 8)
4,--<}°.°™ (10.23)
0 C+ Cm

which are diagonal, as expected. The even- and odd-mode characteristic impedances

he

Loe = 7m
C--Cm
€---m

Loo =

are

C+ Cm
respectively, while the even- and odd-mode phase velocities are
1

vy = oe (10.25)

(€~m)(e+ em)
A schematic implementing the modal decomposition of the symmetric coupled transmission lines is shown in Figure 10.12 for a line of length d.

For weak coupling, when ¢ >> m and c > cm, then

coe m) =m ;
(¢ -- Cm) (c+ Cm) eo = 22, (10.26)

=d/ (-m)(ctem)

Figure 10.12. Schematic implementation of symmetric coupled transmission lines

using modal decomposition into two isolated transmission lines.

[PAGE 379]
365

Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Lines

where Z, = ./é/c is the characteristic impedance of an isolated line. This relation-

ship shows that increasing Z,. always means decreasing Zo.

Crosstalk on a Symmetric Pair of Lines
Consider a pair of long, symmetric coupled transmission lines with the ports numbered as shown in Figure 10.4. For any excitation at ports 1 and 2, the modal

voltages are given by (10.21).

Near-end Crosstalk

The modal currents are derived from impedance relationships as

vetvy
L, -- | V22oe

tm
Ug--V4

V22Z 50

The terminal currents at ports 1 and 2 can be found from the modal currents as

1 _ 1 vetv,
i- | ve va V2Loe
1 1 V2-0,
2 v2 V2Z 50
Vvoty -- varvi
= | 240 2200 (10.27)
vatvy + U2--V]
2Zoe 2Zo0

Let port 2 be terminated in an impedance Zj. The voltage at port 2 is then

v2 = --tgZo = --Zo (See + S54),

2Zoe 2Zo0
where the negative sign accounts for the direction of current flow. Solving for v2/v,
to obtain a coefficient for the near-end crosstalk noise yields

Zoe ~~ Zoo

Kne = >--~S
Zoe + Zoo + 2 4aghea

(10.28)

It is readily apparent that the largest crosstalk occurs for port 2 open-circuited,
then the familiar worst-case near-end crosstalk formula is

Loe --_ Loo

Kye oe = Sp
, pen .
Zoe + Zoo

[PAGE 380]
366 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

An endless variety of special cases can be considered. To consider just one,
assume that Z2 = ,/€/c (the matched condition for the isolated line) and that the

coupling is weak. The even-mode impedance is

£
Zoe = +m
C-- Cm

- yf 1+m/é
~ Ve l--Cm/¢

wy feat + gin/e (10.29)

el 30m /e'

and similarly, the odd-mode impedance is
£1--im/é
Zoo % ve Tmt 10.30
°° C1+ jem/c ( )
Substituting these into (10.28) along with (10.26) and dropping second order small
terms yields

mm

1 (fm
Kye weak /matched = 4 (= + =) ' (10.31)

which matches the heuristically derived result in (2.62).

Far-end Crosstalk

The modal voltages injected onto the coupled pair of transmission lines propagate
to ports 3 and 4 with delays governed by the modal phase velocities. Assuming
that all the ports are sufficiently matched so that reflected wave amplitudes are

negligible, then the modal voltages at ports 3 and 4 can be written from (10.21) as

Uma 7 volt d/ve) te (t-d/ve)
Uma volt Salve) (t--d/v.)

where d is the length of the coupled pair of lines. The voltages at ports 3 and 4 are

1 _ 1
"S] | VE Wve | | tm | (10.32)
v4 A a Uma
SO
vg = ER AP eal lve), walt = df) < en(t-- de) (10.33)

[PAGE 381]
367

Section 10.2. Coupled Transmission Lines

In a homogeneous medium, all of the transverse electromagnetic modes have the
same phase velocity, so for a symmetric two-line system vu. = v,. In this case, the

voltages from line 1 cancel, leaving
v4 = Vo(t -- d/ve),

which is just the time-delayed version of any signal driven at port 2. Specifically,
there is no dependence on v;, so there is no crosstalk. While a symmetric pair of
transmission lines in a homogeneous medium has near-end crosstalk, there is no
far-end crosstalk.

The far-end cancellation fails when v- # Uo, and a pulse crosstalk waveform
results. Assume that no signal drives port 2 so that just the crosstalk appears at

port 4, then from (10.33)
1
M4 = 5 (01(t -- d/ve) -- vi(t -- d/vo)) . (10.34)

With longer lines, less cancellation occurs as the two shifted versions of v; get
farther out of alignment, and a larger pulse results. The generation of a crosstalk
noise pulse is sketched in Figure 10.13 for a low-to-high transition. Here, the even

mode is shown slower than the odd mode since, for microstrip-like lines, the even

v4 (0)

waveform at
odd mode velocity

a

a
"~s-- waveform at
even mode velocity

t
crosstalk waveform

Figure 10.13. Sketch of far-end crosstalk resulting from unequal even- and odd-

mode phase velocities after propagating a distance d.

[PAGE 382]
368 Wideband Madeling Chapter 10

mode has more electric flux in the dielectric, leading to a higher effective dielectric

constant and lower phase velocity. For triangular edges and time shifts less than the

rise time, then

VA,peak = 5 (vy (t _ d/ve) -- Vi) (t _ d/vVo))

1 dv,
=p 4te
~_i(@_4¢\au (10.35)
~ 2h, ve) dt'
For weak coupling,
1 1
Ve

Vee 1+ 3m/é-- sCm/¢
and

1 1
Vo >

Vee 1-- $m/l+ 5¢m/C
Substituting these into (10.35) yields the far-end crosstalk peak voltage

1 d
U4, peak = 34 (Zoe -- ) a (10.36)

where Z, = \/é/c, the characteristic impedance of the isolated line. This is the

same result derived heuristically in chapter 2, equation (2.61).

10.3. Skin Effect Models

The skin effect and current crowding are, in general, frequency-dependent phenomena. While the black box modeling technique in section 10.4 can be applied to
model skin effects, in many cases simple models are sufficient. Two approaches are
the PEEC method and ladder networks.

The PEEC method, discussed in chapter 7, section 7.3, can often be used to
model skin effects and current crowding for short interconnects. To capture fre
quency dependence in a time-domain simulator, the PEEC model is not reduced
using (7.6). Given frequency-dependent data, perhaps obtained through measure-

ment, a PEEC model cannot be synthesized, since (7.6) is not reversible. Therefore,

[PAGE 383]
Section 10.4. Black Box Modeling 369

the PEEC method is good for analytical work given geometrical information, but
it is not good for modeling data.

In chapter 7, section 7.4 it is shown that the frequency-dependent resistance and
inductance of coaxial waveguide can be described by a ladder network consisting of
resistors and inductors, as suggested in Figure 7.9b. For other types of transmission
lines, the RE ladder network is still a good description and can be used to model
frequency-dependence in interconnects. Except for the coaxial line, formulas based
on geometrical information are not available to compute the component values of
the AL ladder, so the component values must be obtained through optimization.
Alternatively, a ladder can be synthesized using the technique in section 10.4. Deeper

ladders provide better square root frequency dependence and wider frequency range.

10.4 Black Box Modeling

If nothing is known about a network, or the modeler chooses not to incorporate any
knowledge, a black box model can be constructed that makes no claim to a physical
basis but that accurately reproduces the network's terminal characteristics. For
each element of a frequency-dependent admittance (or impedance, or S-parameter,
etc.) matrix, a rational function is fitted over a specified bandwidth. Simply put,
the rational function is a representation of the network in terms of its complex
poles and zeros. The rational function can be used directly in a circuit simulator, if
supported, or a network can be synthesized that implements the rational function
in terms of standard circuit elements. With this very general method, any network
can be modeled and incorporated into a simulation.

For example, consider the input impedance of a lossless transmission line shorted

at the far end. The input impedance is given by
Zin = 72, tan(kd), (10.37)

where Z, = \/€/c, k = wv/€e, and d are the line's characteristic impedance, propa-

gation constant, and length. The input impedance is zero whenever kd = n7, and

[PAGE 384]
370 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

infinite whenever kd = 5 + nz. A lumped model consisting of a series inductance
only provides zero input impedance at w = 0. As kd nears 7/2, the input impedance
of the model fails to capture the rapidly increasing input impedance because the
impedance of the inductor increases only linearly with frequency. The bandwidth
of the lumped model can be improved by adding a capacitance to ground; then the
model works well until kd nears 7. The bandwidth can be improved in increments
of 1/2 by alternately adding series inductance or shunt capacitance. In pole-zero
terminology, the problem lies in the fact that (10.37) contains an infinite number
of poles and zeros. Each added series inductor or shunt capacitor adds a zero and a
pole. In general, the useful bandwidth of a model is then determined by how many
poles and zeros are included.

Black box modeling can also be used to speed up simulations of existing circuits.
A large linear circuit can be separately characterized and fitted with a rational
function approximation. The new model is often called a macro model of the original
circuit. Simulations with the macro model in place of the original circuit can achieve
dramatic reductions in computation time with little to no loss of accuracy.

The method outlined in this section uses rational functions consisting of polynomials. Rational polynomial functions can be difficult to implement for several
reasons. It can be difficult to determine the orders of the polynomials (i.e., the
number of poles and zeros); the calculation of the polynomial coefficients can be
numerically unstable and/or inaccurate if the orders of the polynomials become
large or the bandwidth of the data becomes too great; and, the user must often
write, debug, and validate software. Given these difficulties, a rational polynomial
function may at times be the only option, and they can often work quite well.

This section presents a simple but complete method for synthesizing a network
using rational polynomial function approximation and continued fractions. More
advanced techniques are needed to overcome some of the method's limitations, but
these are beyond the scope of this book. The method is a good introduction and

still quite useful in its own right.

[PAGE 385]
Section 10.4. Black Box Modeling 371

10.4.1 Single Port

Most of the detail required to implement a rational polynomial function approximation is illuminated by the one-port problem. Assume that the input admittance
Y of a one-port network has been obtained at P frequencies. A general rational
polynomial function for Y is

dg + a18s + ags? +--+ +ays™

bo 4+ b18 + bo82 +b bys (10.38)

Y(s) =

If the data is acquired from a network that is lumped, linear, and time invariant,
then the coefficients a; and 0}; are real.
Evaluating (10.38) at each of the P frequencies and cross-multiplying yields
Y (81 )bo + ¥(81)81b1 + Y(s,)87bg +--+» + ¥(81)8¥ by
=ag+ 81a + s¥a2 +:-: + si/au
Y (s2)bo + Y(s82)82b1 + Y(s2)szb2 +--+» +¥(82)84/ bn

_ 2 :
= Gg + §2@) + 8942 +°--+ sham

Y (sp )bo + Y(sp)spb, + Y (sp)s2bo tet Y(sp)sbn

= a9 + spa, + spagt-:-+ sag. (10.39)

To put (10.39) into a convenient matrix form, define the column vectors

@=[a a -- ay]?
b=[b b - by |',
and define the matrices
Y(s1) Y(si)s1 Y(si)s? «-- Y(s1)s
7 Y(s2) Y(s2)s2 Y(s2)s8 ++» Y¥(s2)s¥
B=

Y(s3) Y(s3)s3 Y (s3)s2 vr Y(s3) 93!

Y(sp) Y(sp)sp Y(sp)s% --- Y(sp)s%

[PAGE 386]
372 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

and
1 s, 8} si
1 so 83 sif
A=|1 83 3% si
1 sp 8% sf
Then, (10.39) can be recast as
Bb = Aa, (10.40)
or equivalently,
= = a
|4 -B]] _ | =0. (10.41)
b

So that @ and 5 are computed as real numbers, (10.41) can be rearranged by

breaking Aand B into real and imaginary parts as

A = Ar + gAr
and
B= Br + 5Br
Then (10.41) becomes
An Be * 19, (10.42)
A; --B;

which can be solved using real math.

There are several approaches to solving (10.42). In a direct approach, choose
bp = 1 and plug into (10.42) to reduce it to the standard linear algebra problem
Az = 6. The result is

AR

Ar

*|

=| *]. (10.43)

ol Sy
|

-B
_B,

[PAGE 387]
Section 10.4. Black Box Modeling 373

where
b = [ bi bo bn ir,
Y=[Y(s1) Y¥(s2) Y(sp) |',
and
Y(si)s1 Y(si)s? +++ ¥(s1)8%
Y(s2)s2 Y(s2)s5 --- ¥(s2)si!
B = Y (s3)s3 Y (83 )sé cre Y (83) 83
Y(sp)sp Y(sp)sp ure Y(sp)s8

If 2P =M+N-+1, then (10.43) can be solved by matrix inversion to find @ and
3. If 2P > M+ N +1, then a least-squares solution is required, and many options
are available including inversion of the normal equations, the QR algorithm, or the
singular value decomposition.

The set of equations in (10.43) becomes ill-conditioned as the bandwidth increases and as the orders of the polynomials increase. The condition of the matrix
can be dramatically improved by scaling the frequency by the maximum frequency.
The problem should be solved with the best numerical algorithm available in high
precision, and the QR algorithm can achieve good results. For any given application,
the bandwidth and polynomial orders require close attention to ensure an accurate
rational function approximation. Polynomial approximations are generally better
behaved if they are overconstrained, so oversampling to achieve 2P > M+N+4+1
is desirable.

A fundamental question arises as to the values that should be selected for the
polynomial orders, M and N. One strategy for automatic selection could start with
M = N = 1, then compute the rational function approximation and the error
between the approximation and the data. If the error is large, then increase M

and/or N and repeat until the error drops below some specified cutoff value. For

[PAGE 388]
374 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

large values of M and/or N, numerical instability results in large error, so the
process is not guaranteed to work. If a sufficient fit has not been achieved, the only
recourse is to reduce the bandwidth and try again (or switch to a more sophisticated
fitting method).

A different approach to solving (10.42) is to treat it as an eigenvalue problem.
In the general case, 2P > M + N + 2, so (10.42) can be squared up by forming the
normal equations. Multiplying through by the transpose yields

= T = =
Ar --Br Ar --Br a
By,

A A, --B,; | | 6

= 0, (10.44)

Ar

and the left-hand side is now a square (M/+N-+2)x(M+N-+2) matrix. The standard
eigenvalue problem is 'Az = Az, so if X is zero, then 'Az = 0 and the form of (10.44)
is recovered. The strategy is then to solve (10.44) as an eigenvalue problem, pick
an eigenvalue equal to or sufficiently near zero, and then the eigenvector associated
with the eigenvalue provides a and b.

The eigenvalue method provides some help in choosing the polynomial orders.
Choose M and N too small, and all of the eigenvalues are large. Choose them too
large, and many near-zero eigenvalues will appear. A good solution is obtained when
there is just one near-zero eigenvalue.

Even with careful selection of polynomial orders and careful computation of the
polynomial coefficients, poles on the right-hand side of the complex plane can still
appear. Interconnects are passive, hence stable, so no right-hand poles should be
present in the model. Unfortunately, absence of right-hand poles cannot be guaranteed. However, right-hand poles can be easily computed and removed, so a generalpurpose, robust method can be constructed. Note that absence of right-hand poles

ensures stability but not passivity.

Right-Hand Pole Removal!

The first step in right-hand pole removal is the computation of the poles of the

rational polynomial function given by (10.38). The N zeros of the denominator can

[PAGE 389]
Section 10.4. Black Box Modeling 375

easily be found by solving for the eigenvalues of the N x NV companion matrix

bn 1 bn--2 wee _ db _ bo
_ by ~~ by bn oN
1 O - 0 0
0 1 0 )
0 0 «. 1 0

Any zero with positive real part is discarded.
Once the right-hand poles are eliminated, the denominator polynomial must be
reconstructed from the remaining zeros. Assume that N' of the original N zeros

remain; then the new polynomial is

N'
f(s) = [[(s +p), (10.45)
i=l

where p; are the remaining zeros. Note that the p; are either real or appear in complex conjugate pairs, so f(s) is still described by a polynomial with real coefficients.

The product in (10.45) can be iteratively constructed by noting that

M
(s+a)f(s) = (s+a)S > &s! (10.46)
i=0
M *
= abo + s- (ab; + bi-1) sh + bys', (10.47)
i=]

Repeated application with the starting polynomial set to f (s) = 8 +p, yields the
new denominator polynomial.
The new denominator means that the numerator coefficients are no longer valid.

Since the denominator is known, (10.38) can be rearranged as

M
Y (s) = Sais', (10.48)

i=0
where

N

Y¥ (s) = ¥(s) S~ bis?

t=O

[PAGE 390]
376 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

is known. Evaluating (10.48) at P frequencies yields

f

Y --Aa, (10.49)

where
T

f

¥ =| y'(s1) ¥'(s2) => ¥'(sp) |
and A and @ take the same definitions from (10.41). To solve using only real math,
let Y = Yn + WV), then (10.49) becomes
YR | An a. (10.50)

Y, Ar
Solution of this linear equation (and generally a least-squares problem) completes
the rational function approximation with guaranteed absence of right-hand poles.

Once a rational function approximation has been constructed for a given bandwidth, it is important to utilize the function only over that bandwidth. Particular
care must be observed when using ramp functions to provide excitation in SPICE-
like simulations, since the corner at the transition from the triangular edge to the
flat section produces significant frequency components to very wide bandwidths. It

may be necessary to provide filtering to limit the bandwidth of ramp-like functions.

Continued Fractions

Rational polynomial functions can be rewritten as continued fractions. Since network analysis of ladder networks leads directly to continued fractions, then ladder
networks can be synthesized from rational polynomial functions through continued
fractions. To compute a continued fraction from a rational polynomial function, two

formulas are needed. It is easily verified that

; N--1 ;
Die tis? ay | Ying (ai - Ex bj )s*

nr i a \ 10.51
ae 5; s* by yN b;s* ( )
and
rico ais" _ an ao+ Day (ai - pe bi_1) 5°

= _ = a ir et 10.52
we bist bw 1 ND! bist ( )

[PAGE 391]
Section 10.4. Black Box Modeling 377

which result from extracting the pole at infinity. These two equations lead to ladders
in the First Cauer Form. A similar set of equations can be derived by extracting
the pole at zero, leading to the Second Cauer Form. Because ladder networks are
not unique, neither form is preferred.

Fach of equations (10.51) and (10.52) reduces the order of the numerator polynomial by one. After extraction of a term, the remaining rational function can be
inverted to enable the repeated application of the formulas. The process continues
until the entire rational function has been reduced.

For example, assume that a rational function fits frequency-dependent admittance data and that Af = N. Applying (10.51) extracts a constant admittance term
that can be inverted to find a resistance for inclusion in a netlist. The remaining
rational function represents an admittance in parallel to the resistor. Inverting the
remaining rational function, it now describes impedance, and applying (10.52) extracts an inductance (sL). The remaining rational function represents an impedance
in series with the inductor. Inverting the remaining rational function yields an admittance function, so we are back where we started except that the orders of the
numerator and denominator have been reduced by one. This process is repeated to
extract an RL ladder like the one in chapter 7, Figure 7.9b.

The formulas can be applied differently to obtain a different ladder network.
Again assume that a rational function fits frequency-dependent admittance data,
but let NV = Mf +1. Applying (10.52) extracts a capacitance (sC'), then immediately
applying (10.51) (without inverting) extracts a parallel admittance. The remaining
rational function represents admittance in parallel to the paralleled RC circuit. Inverting the remaining rational function yields an impedance, and applying (10.52)
and (10.51) yields a series resistance and inductance. Inverting the remaining ratio-

nal function restarts the process.

Example: Rational Function Approximation and Network Synthesis

Using the program in Appendix B, the frequency-dependent impedance is computed

for copper coax with an inner radius of 100m, an outer radius of 400m, and an

[PAGE 392]
378

Wideband Modeling

Chapter 10

Table 10.1. Rational function approximation for a coaxial line with an inner radius

of 100um, an outer radius of 400um, and an outer conductor thickness of 99m.

So

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

3.685456e-06
2.211692e-04
1.856831e-03
3.297555e-03
1.771712e-03
4.30040 1e-04
6.104166e-05
2.944794e-06
4.361208e-11

2.339143e-06
1.492312e-03
7.324409e-02
5.768429e-01
1.000000e+00
5.320013e-01
1.286278e-01
1.8174116-02
8.718464e-04

outer conductor thickness of 994m. As discussed in chapter 7, section 7.4, a ladder

network can be used to create a SPICE model that can reproduce the frequency-

dependent terminal impedance while using only frequency-independent components.

Applying (10.43) to set up and solve for a rational polynomial function approximation to the simulated terminal admittance yields the expansion listed in
Table 10.1 when the data is fitted over the frequency range from 0.106MHz to
1.06GHz. Note that frequency scaling of 1.06GHz is incorporated into Table 10.1.

The rational function is converted into a continued fraction through repeated

application of (10.51) and (10.52), leading directly to the SPICE netlist.

-Subckt ladder 1 out
Rpi i out 1.999094e+07
Lal 1 2 2.782367e-07
Rp2 2 out 3.336287e6+01
Ls2 2 3 4.055090e-09
Rp3 3 out 1.614620e+01
Ls3 3 4 7.901239e-09
Rp4 4 out 6.923177¢6+00

[PAGE 393]
Section 10.4. Black Box Modeling

Ls4
Rp5
Ls5
Rpé
Ls6
Rp7
Ls7
Rps8
Ls8
Rp?

4

5
5
6
6
7
7
8
8
9

-ends

5 -1.467985e-08
out 2.205033e+01
6 4.368958e-10
out --1.810383e+01
T 3.073400e-08
out 5.538082e+00
8 3.162878e-08
out 2.493410e+00
9 1.090311¢e-07
out 1.302984e+00
ladder

379

The input impedance of this network is computed in SPICE, converted to re-

sistance and inductance, and plotted against the original computed data in Fig-

ure 10.14. The agreement between the synthesized network and the data is excel-

lent. At low frequencies, resistance dominates reactance and is more closely fitted.

The SPICE model nicely extrapolates the terminal behavior. N. ote that the ladder

is stable (no right-hand poles) but active (negative lumped component values).

100

--
oS

Resistance, Q/m

--

350

Data o
Simulation ----

340
330
320
310
300

Inductance, nH/m

290
280

10° §=10° «1071989?

Frequency, Hz

Figure 10.14. Resistance and inductance comparison between frequency-

dependent data and a synthesized SPICE model for a coaxial] transmission line.

[PAGE 394]
380 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

10.4.2 Multiple Ports

An N-port network is described by a frequency-dependent N x N matrix. Fundamentally, a rational function approximation is required for each matrix element.
Assuming reciprocity, then N(N + 1)/2 rational function approximations are required. Each element can be fitted individually or simultaneously.

If each element is fitted individually, then the methodology for the one-port
circuit can be applied to each matrix element. For each of the elements, the rational
function approximations can be entirely different, or they can be constrained as
desired. For example, the denominator polynomial can be computed once and then
assumed to be the same for all remaining matrix elements by using the formulation
in (10.50).

Alternatively, all of the matrix elements can be fitted simultaneously. The fol-

lowing sections demonstrate both techniques.

Full Matrix Fit

Assuming that each matrix element has the same poles, an admittance matrix for

a @-port circuit can be fitted as

EMoalts! Malet CMa al@e!
Dizo bist Demo 6:8* Dino Os?
_ M g2lgt 3M, a2? 5! SM g22 si
= = . 41150 i - sae Sig p--i_--
Y(s) = iso 5:8? Lixo bist Dino bist
Wispars! Pits ae?s' Diz aes
Viso bis? Dizo bis? Lixo 0:8?

Applying the single-port methodology from (10.40), the ijth entry in the admittance

matrix can be fitted as

where

[PAGE 395]
Section 10.4. Black Box Modeling 381

A is defined as before, and

Y(s:) Y8(si)s. Y8(si)sp -- YY (sisi
¥'5(s2) Yi(s2)s2 Y4(s2)s3 --- Y"(s2)sy
B =| Y(s3) Y(s3)s3 Y9(s3)s8 --- Y9(s3)s3"
Y8(sp) Y4(sp)sp Y(sp)sp --- Y(sp)sp

Assembling the equations for all ij into one expression for a Q-port admittance
matrix yields

zll

= =11
Ao 0 -- 0 "8 1
0 A 0 0 8 -
0 0A: 0 -B = 0. (10.53)
529
= 2 a
0 0 0 --- A ---B :

Assuming a reciprocal admittance matrix, then there are Q(Q@ + 1)/2 matrix
entries for a Q-port matrix. The size of the matrix on the left-hand side of (10.53)

is
PQ(Q + 1)/2 x (M+ 1)Q(Q+1)/2+N+1),

while the left-hand column is of size

[((M + 1)Q(Q+1)/2+N41]) x1

A square matrix requires that

2(N + 1)
P=1+M+--------,
QQ + 1)
which requires large N for large Q. In practice, an overdetermined system is required, but that is desirable anyway. Details remain regarding real math, right-hand

pole removal, and so on.

[PAGE 396]
382 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

Matrix Element Fit

A matrix can be fitted by individually modeling each matrix element. Since no additional derivation is required, the technique is demonstrated by modeling a lossy
transmission line. Most circuit simulators include a model for the lossless transmission line, but few include a general model for the lossy case.

The exact equations for the 2 x 2 admittance matrix for a lossy transmission
line are used to generate a data set that is then fitted with a rational polynomial
function approximation and modeled with SPICE-compatible lumped elements.

As in the single-port example, the program in Appendix B is used to compute
the frequency-dependent impedance for copper coax with an inner radius of 100um,
an outer radius of 400m, and an outer conductor thickness of 99um. These perunit-length resistance and inductance values are used in chapter 4, equation (4.21)
along with an assumed capacitance per-unit-length of 80pF/m to find the complex
admittance matrix of a 3cm, 602 transmission line.

To model the two-port network in SPICE, the lumped z-network in chapter 4,
Figure 4.8a is used with frequency-dependent admittances that are implemented as
frequency-independent ladder networks. Since the transmission line is symmetric,
yi = y3. The results from problem 13 in chapter 4 show that the a-network can be
constructed by inspection once the 2 x 2 admittance matrix is known.

Using the method in section 10.4.1 with right-hand pole removal, the data for
yi is fitted over the frequency range from 3.3kHz to 3.0GHz, and the plots in
Figure 10.15 show the excellent quality of the fit. The SPICE deck for yi is as

follows:

-subckt y1 1 out

Rpl 1 out 1.448679e+03
Cp1 1 out 1.385524e-15
Rel 1 t1 2.330182e+00
Lsi t1 2 2.306115e-09
Rp2 2 out -1.6966126e+04
Cp2 2 out 1.3465536-12
Rs2 2 t2 7.305309e-02
Ls2 t2 3 5.836348e-09
Rp3 3 out -3.1132556e+04

[PAGE 397]
Section 10.4. Black Box Modeling 383

Cp3 3 out 1.716403e-12
Rs3 3 t3 7.009935e-02
Ls3 t3 4 6,494891e-09
Rp4 4 out -2.145872e+04
Cp4 4 out 1.9105166-12
Rse4 4 t4 3.028198e-02
Ls4 t4 5 7.489118e-09
Rp5S 5 out -1.0417406e+04
Cp5 5 out 2.371987e-12
Rs& & t5 -8.263632e-02
Ls5 t5 6 1.041090e-08
Rp6 6 out -2.195519e+03
Cp6 6 out 4.457509¢6-12

-ends yi

Note the negative component values, meaning that the model is active, but since
there are no right-hand poles, the network is stable.

Similarly for yo, the data is fitted over a slightly smaller range of 3.3kHz to
1.05GHz to achieve better numerical stability, and the excellent fit is shown in
Figure 10.16. For this example, an RL ladder outperforms an RLC ladder, and the
resulting SPICE deck is:

-Subckt y2 1 out

Rp1 1 out 2.2528866+01
Lsi1 1 2 -1,.164067e-10
Rp2 2 out -2.249623e+01
Ls2 2 3 -9.628880e-08
Rp3 3 out -6.111747a+01
Ls3 3 4 6.271309e-to
Rp4 4 out 6.071545e+08
Ls4 4 5 9.0418976-07
RpS 5 out 2.978254e+02
Ls6 5 6 -2.304350e-09
Rp6 6 out -2.9741216+02
Ls6 6 7 -2,566824e-06
Rp7 7 out -2.410449e+03
Ls? 7 8 6.240773e-08
Rp8 & out 2.262089e+03

[PAGE 398]
384

Wideband Modeling

Ls& 8 9 1.782445e-06

Rp9 9 out 1.245023e+00

Ls9 9 10 2.172213e-08

Rp10 10 out 2.247830e-01

ends y2

Again, the network is stable but active.

Magnitude, dB

Phase, deg

-100

v. Exact
-120 ss Rational Function

aa Continued Fraction - - -
-140 Spice ----

-160
103 104 105 106 107 108 10° 19!

Frequency, Hz

Exact

Rational Function
Continued Fraction ~ - -
Spice ------

10° 104 105 10° 107 108 10? 1910
Frequency, Hz

Chapter 10

Figure 10.15. Fitted SPICE model of the one-port frequency-dependent admit-

tance yj.

[PAGE 399]
Section 10.4. Black Box Modeling 385

Magnitude, dB

Exact ©
Rational Function -----
Continued Fraction - - -
Spice ----

103 104 10> 10° 107 108 109 19/0

150
Exact
100 Rational Function
Continued Fraction - - -
Spice ----
50
iy
ne]
sg 0
a
x
-50 f
-100
4
-150
103 107 =105 = 19 =~ 497 108 ~-- 109 19'°

Frequency, Hz

Figure 10.16. Fitted SPICE model of the one-port frequency-dependent admit-

tance yo.

[PAGE 400]
bs ba

Voltage at Source, V

Frequency-domain Simulation
Spice Simulation With Lossy Model
Spice Simulation With T-Line Model. *"~

Frequency-domain Simulation
Spice Simulation With Lossy Model
Spice Simulation With T-Line Made) ~*~

Woltage at Load, VW

Figure 10.17. Comparison of simulation methods for a lossy transmission line

[PAGE 401]
387

Section 10.5. Exercises

Combining the SPICE decks for y; and yo into a a-network enables the simulation of the transmission line with frequency-dependent losses in a time-domain
circuit simulator. For example, the voltages at the source and load of the above
transmission line are shown in Figure 10.17 for the nearly matched case. Since
this example contains no nonlinear elements, a frequency-domain simulation is also
shown for comparison. The frequency-domain and lossy time-domain results are
quite close, while the lossless simulation introduces some error. More dramatic differences can be easily demonstrated with a longer transmission line and/or higher

losses.

10.5 Exercises

1. Derive a set of two continued fraction formulas that reduce rational functions
by extracting the pole at zero. Application of these formulas leads to ladder

networks of the Second Cauer Form.

2. Sketch a schematic that implements the following continued fraction, using

only frequency-independent lumped elements:

Y(s) = 58+

3. Derive a formulation where a known DC valne can be incorporated into a

rational function approximation.

4. Derive a formulation where a known high-frequency asymptotic limit can be

incorporated into a rational function approximation.

5. From chapter 2, equation (2.66) the input impedance of a loaded lossless

transmission line is

Zr + 74, tan(d)

Zin = Lo .
Zo + 741 tan( Jd)

[PAGE 402]
388 Wideband Modeling Chapter 10

(a) Expand the numerator and the denominator in infinite power series about

Gd and derive a rational function approximation for Zin.
(b) How many poles and zeros does it take to represent a transmission line?

(c) Keep two terms in the numerator and denominator and derive a contin-

ued fraction approximation for Zin.

(d) Sketch the circuit suggested by the continued fraction, assuming that the

load is a frequency-independent resistor.

6. A lossless 750 transmission line with é€e¢ = 9.8 is 2.5cm long. Sketch a lumped

model for the line that is suitable for signals with edge rates as short as 0.5ns.

7. Derive a modal decomposition for the multiconductor transmission line for
the case of high resistance, where it is assumed that @ = 9g = 0. On-chip

interconnects are usually modeled as RC lines.

8. In a homogeneous medium, the phase velocities of all modes are identical. For
the even and odd modes of a pair of symmetric transmission lines, show that
m Cm
£
in a homogeneous medium. From the discussion in chapter 2, section 2.5.3,

what does this mean regarding crosstalk on these two lines?

9. Show that (10.18) holds for a pair of symmetric transmission lines in a homo-

geneous medium.

10. (a) Find the modal characteristic impedances and phase velocities for three

symmetric transmission lines described by

ell
i

3s 3 &

Ss 8 3

~ 3 3

[PAGE 403]
389

Section 10.5. Exercises

and
C --Cm --Cm
€=| -cn C --Cm
~Cm --Cm €

(b) Sketch a circuit that implements these three coupled lines using three

uncoupled transmission line models.

li. (a) Show that the near-end coupling coefficient to a small load, 72, for sym-

metric coupled transmission lines is given by

1 Zoe ~ Zoo
Kne 7 3% Loe Zoo

(b) Show that for weak coupling, this expression simplifies to

1 C/™m Cm
Kne © --Za,/© é <n).
ne 2 af é + c
12. The input impedance of a lossless one-port network with a zero at infinity
must be of the form!
2 2\ (2 2 2 2
8(8" + wt )(s* + we) ---(s* + wha,
(9) = KARA ADE + 08) (88 ty
(s? + wo )(s? + w3)--+(s? + wy)
where 0 < wo < wi < wo: < won_o < Wen-1 < won < co and K is
a positive constant. Derive a formulation similar to (10.40) to fit a rational

function to P pairs of Z and s data.

ce
1. Norman Balabanian and Theodore Beckart, Linear Network Theory: Analysis, Properties,
Design, and Synthesis. Chesterland, Ohio: Matrix Publishers, Inc., 1981, p. 484.

[PAGE 405]
Chapter 11

ENHANCING SIGNAL
INTEGRITY

Up to this point, signal integrity is covered through presentation of basic phenomena
and general analysis techniques. Many specific topics, such as termination schemes
for minimizing reflections, are implicitly covered but require the reader to fill in the
gaps. This chapter fleshes out a few major signal integrity topics both to spare the

reader the need to extend the prior material and to serve as detailed examples.

11.1 Differential Signaling

The multiconductor interconnects discussed up to this point rely on one conductor
per signal with a shared return path, such as a ground plane. This type of signaling
is called single-ended. Voltages generated by one signal on the shared return path
automatically show up in the others, so single-ended signaling tends to be noisy due
to this common-mode noise. Note that SSN is common-mode noise.

It is possible to dedicate two conductors per signal with each line driven out
of phase, leading to differential signaling on a differential pair. At the receive end,
a differential amplifier recovers the signal as the difference in the voltages on the
two lines. A differential pair still shares a common return path, but the commonmode noise introduced by the return path is rejected by the differential receiver.

Therefore, differential signaling is very quiet compared to single-ended signaling and

391

[PAGE 406]
392 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

can operate to much higher signaling rates. Because differential signaling offers the
highest signal integrity, it forms the foundation of many high-performance signaling
standards, including LVDS and ECL.

The rejection of common-mode noise can be demonstrated using modal decomposition. If the signal waveform to be transmitted down a differential pair is called

v(t), then two new out-of-phase waveforms can be defined as

v1(t) = vo -- sult)

vo(t) Uo + sue)

where v, is a constant voltage. The voltages v, and v2 are launched at one end of
a pair of symmetric coupled transmission lines as shown in Figure 11.1. According

to chapter 10, equation (10.21), the voltages of the even and odd modes are

u(t) = V2u,
vo(t) = v(t) /V2.

The even mode carries only a DC component, which generates no noise on reactive
parasitics, while the odd mode carries a weighted version of the signal.

If the pair of transmission lines are tightly coupled (a proper design), then an
external source of noise is impressed equally on both lines as common-mode noise.

The signal then has high noise immunity to SSN, crosstalk, and EMI. The even mode

Pp 4

v{t)
v(t) v(t-d/v,)
vt)
Differential Differential
Driver Differential Pair Receiver

Figure 11.1. Differential signaling using a symmetric coupled pair of transmission

lines.

[PAGE 407]
Section 11.1. Differential Signaling 393

collects the common-mode noise, while the odd mode remains relatively noise-free.
Superimposing common-mode noise onto the far-end mode voltages yields

ve(t + At) = V2v6 + noise (t)

vo(t+At) = v(t - d/v,)/Vv2,
where v, is the odd-mode phase velocity. Based on (10.32), the terminal voltages

at the far end are
Ve(t + At) -- vo(t + At)

vi(t + At) = F
= Vo + Vnoise (t)/V2 -- u(t _ d/v,)/2
v(t + At) = ve(t + At) + vo(t + At)

v2
Vo + Unoise (t)/V2 + u(t _ d/o) /2.

At the far end, a differential receiver is used to detect only the difference between

the signals on the two lines, yielding the output
Ureceived = vo(t + At) -- Vi (t + At)
= v{t --d/v).

Therefore, differential signaling enables the transmission of a signal at the odd-mode
phase velocity without being corrupted by common-mode noise.

Compared to single-ended signaling, differential signaling requires more complex
drivers and receivers plus double the interconnect leads. However, the immunity to
SSN allows a reduction in the number of power and ground pins in packages, sockets.
and connectors. In addition, the excellent noise immunity may allow the deletion of
some bypass capacitors.

Breaks in the symmetry of the differential pair cause mode conversion between
the even and odd modes. Common-mode noise is injected onto the differential signal
whenever symmetry is disrupted. For maximum performance, all components must
maintain excellent symmetry. Each line must look just like the other.

Finally, some common-mode noise does get through the receiver to appear as
noise on the signal. Good differential receivers have a high common-mode rejection

ratio to maximize the rejection of common-mode noise.

[PAGE 408]
394 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

Figure 11.2. Basic far-end parallel termination.

11.2 Termination

When the load impedance does not match the characteristic impedance of a transmission line, a fraction of the signal is reflected from the load and propagates
back down the line. While the reflected wave can be used to advantage in sourceterminated second-incidence switching schemes, reflected waves usually serve no
useful function and simply degrade signal quality.

A typical receiver has a small input capacitance (roughly 5pF*) that leads to a
reflection coefficient near +1. 'To minimize reflections, an impedance can be added
in parallel to the receiver to create a reflection coefficient near zero. Basic far-end
parallel termination at the receiver is shown in Figure 11.2. A resistance equal to
the real part of the transmission line characteristic impedance is sufficient.

Basic termination is quite simple--add matched resistors in parallel to the loads.
In practice, several factors, including parasitics and location, power dissipation, and

multiconductor termination, can complicate termination design.

11.2.1 Parasitics and Location

Resistors have a small but significant series parasitic inductance. In addition, the
PCB pads and vias required to mount a resistor introduce additional series inductance. Both sources of inductance should be minimized to keep the resistance as real
as possible over the widest bandwidth. Small surface-mount resistors make excellent

terminators, and a good PCB layout technique is suggested in Figure 11.3.

[PAGE 409]
395

Section 11.2. Termination

Surface Trace
Buried Trace

Ground Plane Ground Plane

Resistor ual Resistor 7
Ee Via to Via to | a Via to

(a) (b)

Figure 11.3. Low-inductance mounting schemes for: (a) surface routes, (b) buried

routes.

Termination should be applied as close to the receiver as practical to avoid signal
integrity loss from the unterminated stub between the termination and the receiver.
The longer the stub, the greater the effect. For packaged devices, the ideal location
is inside the package, but in practice, a location on the PCB near the package lead

is best.

11.2.2 Static Power Dissipation and Current Carrying
Requirements

Power is dissipated in parallel terminations even when there is no switching activity, and other than the costs associated with the acquisition and assembly of
resistors, this is the main disadvantage of parallel termination. The topology of the
termination can reduce power dissipation in some applications.

Four options for parallel termination of a transmission line of characteristic
impedance Z, are shown Figure 11.4, which includes the basic configuration in
Figure 11.2. The transmission line is not shown, while for each case, a switch rep-

resentation of a totem-pole driver is shown both holding high and holding low. The

[PAGE 410]
396 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

Holding Low ~ Holding High " Holding Low Holding High

(a) Termination to Ground (b} Termination to Power

Holding Low Holding High ~ Holding Low Holding High

(c) Thevenin Termination (d) Termination to Voltage

Figure 11.4. Four parallel termination schemes and DC current paths for totem-

pole drivers.

driver impedance is assumed to be R when holding either high or low. The receiver
is represented by C,, which allows no DC current path. In all cases, sufficient bypass
capacitance is assumed so that Vpp is a good AC ground.

In Figure 11.4a, the termination resistor is tied to ground, and when holding
high the static power dissipation is V2, /(R+Z,), while the DC power is zero when
holding low. Therefore, there is an imbalance between the two states, and if a digital
signal predominately holds low, power can be saved by termination to ground. The
Static power dissipation between the two states can be flipped by termination to
Vpp, as shown in Figure 11.4b; then power can be saved if a signal predominately
holds high.

One disadvantage of termination to only power or ground is the level of current

[PAGE 411]
397

Section 11.2. Termination

that one of the totem-pole transistors must source. In Figure 11.4a, the upper
transistor must be capable of continuously sourcing Vpp/(R+ Z,). Similarly, the
lower transistor in Figure 11.4b must be able to source the same amount. By using
two termination resistors to create a Thevenin termination, as shown in Figure 11-4c,
both hoiding-low and holding-high states dissipate V3, /(2Z. + R||2Z,), so neither
state is preferred. Each transistor must be able to continuously source Vpp/[2(R+
Zo)]. Therefore, Thevenin termination requires the transistors to source half as
much current as the single termination.

Balanced power dissipation is also achieved with termination to a voltage, as
shown in Figure 11.4d, with Vr = Vyp/2. Power dissipation in both states is
Vbp/[4(R + Z.)] with current-sourcing requirements of Vop/|2(R + Z)]. The advantages of this termination include small parts count, lower power requirements,
and a lower current-sourcing requirement. The major disadvantage is the need for
a good low-impedance power supply voltage at 1 /2Vpp.

For Thevenin termination and termination to voltage, care must be taken not
to leave the input to a receiver at Vpp/2 to avoid large crowbar currents and/or
metastability. For both of these termination types, a failed driver or one set in a
high-impedance output state allows the receiver input to drift to the voltage set by
the termination network. Although it increases power dissipation, a safe design sets
the termination voltage away from Vpp/2.

The power and current requirements of the various parallel termination schemes
are summarized in Table 11.1. To facilitate comparison, normalized power and current are also provided, showing in particular that a termination to Vpp /2 achieves
& quarter of the power (worst-case) and half the current-sourcing requirements of a
single termination. Note that the current requirements are those for the driver and
not for the power supply. Driver specifications must be checked to make sure that
the current requirements of parallel termination can be met,

Static power dissipation can be eliminated by placing a capacitor in series with
the termination resistor, as shown in Figure 11.5, for an unbalanced termination

to ground. This scheme is often called AC termination. The capacitor blocks DC

[PAGE 412]
398 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

Table 11.1. Summary of worst-case static power dissipation and current-sourcing

requirements for various parallel termination schemes.

Power Normalized | Current Normalized

To Power or Ground

. V2 p(R+2Z.)
dD oO
Thevenin ees Z.(R+Z5)

To Voltage Vr = Yep

Figure 11.5. AC termination with series capacitance to eliminate static power

dissipation.

current, so there is no static power dissipation. However, the capacitor decreases the
effectiveness of the termination by reflecting low-frequency signal components and
by providing additional capacitive loading on the transmission line. Optimization is
required to balance termination effectiveness with capacitive loading, and in many

cases no suitable value for the capacitance will be found.

11.2.3 Voltage Swing

Parallel termination creates a voltage divider between the driver source impedance
and the termination resistance that limits the static voltage swings of totem-pole

drivers. For the termination schemes in Figure 11.4, the static voltages holding low

[PAGE 413]
399

Section 11.2. Termination

Table 11.2, Summary of static voltage swings holding low and high with capacitive

loading and parallel termination.

Holding Low Holding High

Single to Ground 0 Vop(Q -- Raz)

Single to Vpp Vpp(1 - Rs) Vpp
Thevenin $Vpv(1 ~ #4) LVpp(I 4 7)

To Voltage Vr = Ye2 3Vpp(1 ~ 324-) 1Vpp(1 + 425-)

and high are summarized in Table 11.2. To obtain the largest noise margins, the
widest voltage swing is required. For each case, the voltage swing is maximized when
& « Z,. A small driver impedance causes a large reflection at the source and, from

Table 11.1, high power dissipation while requiring large current-sourcing capability.

11.2.4 Diode Termination

Parallel termination can be implemented with diodes, as shown in Figure 11.6, to

reduce static power dissipation. For the voltage range from Vss -- Vp to Vpp + Vr,

Figure 11.6. Diode termination.

[PAGE 414]
400 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

where Vp is the threshold voltage of the diodes, the diodcs are reverse-biased and
only pass a very small leakage current. The transmission line is then unterminated
and dissipates no static power. As the voltage drops below Vss -- Vr, the lower diode
turns on and behaves like a resistor, with resistance determined by the slope of the
IV curve. The transmission line is terminated in this resistance while the voltage
stays below Vss -- Vr, so diodes with appropriate slope are needed. The behavior
is similar while the voltage exceeds Vpp + Vr.

Diodes with very steep slope (low resistance) simply clip the waveforms at Vp p+
Vr and Vss -- Vr and reflect high-frequency energy back towards the driver. Noise
reduction is best achieved by dissipating unwanted energy. Hard-clipping diodes
limit undershoot and overshoot but dissipate little energy, so a resistive element is
needed elsewhere.

Standard ESD protection circuits include diode clamping in a configuration identical to diode termination. Therefore, diode termination is almost always present on
packaged devices; however, the diode characteristics are selected to optimize ESD
protection rather than signal integrity. Any diode termination added to enhance

signal integrity requires diodes with a Vr lower than the ESD circuits.

11.2.5 Source Termination

In contrast to parallel termination at the load, source termination (see also chapter 2, section 2.2) allows the signal to reflect. off of the load and travel back to the
source, where it is absorbed by series termination. The series termination can be
implemented as either the output impedance of the driver or as a resistor in series
with the driver, in which case the driver must have an output impedance lower
than the characteristic impedance of the transmission line. The resistor can be implemented within the driver itself, where it is often referred to as ballast, or it can
be implemented externally on the PCB.

The voltage launched onto the transmission line is determined by the volt-

age divider between the driver impedance plus termination and the characteristic

[PAGE 415]
401

Section 11.2. Termination

impedance of the transmission line. Generally, the voltage is
Zo
Zo + Rariver + Reerm

where Voy is the high voltage output of the driver. To fully absorb the reflected

Viaunch == VoH

wave, the driver plus termination must match the characteristic impedance of the
transmission line, then Rariver + Rierm = Zo, and the voltage launched onto the
transmission line is 1/2Vox.

Unless resistance has been added, the input impedance of receivers looks like
a small capacitive load with a reflection coefficient near +1. The incident wave is
almost fully reflected, and the incident and reflected waves combine to double the
voltage of the incident wave at the receiver. For a source-matched driver, the full
voltage swing is restored at the receiver. If parallel termination is also applied at
the receiver, then the reflection coefficient is 0 and the voltage at the receiver swings
to just 1/2Von.

The advantage of source termination is that there is no static power dissipation.
Since the matching resistance is in series with the load capacitance, a driver holding
high or low supplies no current once the load capacitance is charged.

The power advantage of source termination diminishes for long transmission
lines. Until the reflected wave returns to the driver, the load on the driver is strongly
resistive. The driver sees a terminated circuit, and current consumption and power
dissipation are equivalent to a far-end parallel terminated circuit. Once the reflected
wave returns, the load appears capacitive and the current flow and power consumption stop. Therefore, power consumption peaks when the round-trip time equals half
the clock period, assuming a 50% duty cycle. Beyond this point, power dissipation
cycles up and down, depending on the timing of the return reflections.

An example of the length-dependence of power dissipation for source termination
is provided in Figure 11.7, where a 3.3V 500 driver launches a 50MHz clock signal
with a 50% duty cycle onto a 500 transmission line that is loaded at. the far end with
opF of capacitance. The average power dissipation for zero transmission line length

is just CV? f = 2.72mW for the capacitor plus 2mW for the driver (computed with

[PAGE 416]
402 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11
cc =

Far-end Terminated" ~

Unterminated '

Average Dissipated Power, mW

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 4 16 18 = 20

Transmission Line Delay, ns

Figure 11.7. Example power dissipation by a source-terminated driver driving a
long transmission line with the far end both terminated and unterminated. The

circuit topology is from Figure 11.2.

no load), for a total of 4.72mW. As the line length increases, the average power
dissipation increases until the line delay is almost 5ns, where the power equals the

V?/(50 + 50)/2 = 54.5mW static power dissipation of a far-end terminated net.

11.3. Multiconductor Termination

Strongly coupled multiconductor transmission lines should ideally be terminated
in a resistor network that individually terminates each mode. Termination of each
line as if it were in isolation can lead to significant reflections. For lossless coupled
transmission lines, modal decomposition can be used to find the optimal termination
network.

From (10.9) and (10.11), the voltages and currents on a multiconductor transmission line are 5 = Ty Up, andi = T rim, respectively. Since the modal transmission
lines are decoupled, according to chapter 2, equations (2.16) and (2.17), the modal

voltages and currents can be written in terms of forward- and backward-traveling

[PAGE 417]
403

Section 11.3. Multiconductor Termination

waves, SO
Um =U, +B,
and
im =k (ay, Dm)
where
Zol 0 0
= 0 Zo2 0
k = )
0 0 ZoN

and Z,; is the characteristic impedance of the ith mode.

Assume that the multiconductor transmission line is terminated with a network described by the impedance matrix Z. The voltages and currents are related
by 0 = Zi. Substituting the total voltages and currents with the traveling wave

representations of the modal voltages and currents yields

ll
_--

Tv(G,+0;,)=ZTk (of -v,);

then by rearranging

~1

Um = (ZT rk + v) TZ Tk -- Ty joy.

ll

The modal reflection coefficient is identified as

1

==> = = == =-i =
m= (Z Tyk + Ty) UZ T;k --Ty), (11.1)

ml

which is very useful for determining reflections of modes and conversions between

them. In terms of a given load admittance, (11.1) can be rearranged to obtain

1

Tin = (Tk +¥ Ty) (Pik _ Y Ty). (11.2)

[PAGE 418]
404 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

For perfect termination, all modes are completely absorbed at the load, so Ty,

0. From (11.1) this occurs when

-- =-1 =
Tyk -Ty =0

Nill

or

--]

a (11.3)

ll
ae |

-Ty,

NI

A network implementing Z is the optimal termination. The admittance of the

matching network can be found by inverting (11.3) to obtain

= = =-l1=-1
Y=Tk Ty. (11.4)

11.3.1 Single Transmission Line

For a single transmission line, Ty = T, = 1, and k = Zo, 80 the termination
impedance from (11.3) is simply Z,, the characteristic impedance of the transmission

line.

11.3.2 Differential Pair

For a symmetric transmission line pair terminated into a balanced m-network, the
needed inputs are available from chapter 10, equations (10.19) and (10.20), and
problem 13 in chapter 4 (with ys = y,). Evaluating ( 11.4), the optimal termination
network can be found, then equated to the admittance matrix of the m-network to
fill out the circuit.

To view what happens to the even and odd modes, the modal reflection coeffi-

cient from (11.2) can be evaluated with

i. Zoe 0
0 Loo
to obtain
~ 1l-y Loe
Tn = Me 0 | | tmz 0 (11.5)
IT, 0 1~y1 Zo0--2y2 Zoo .

l+y1 LZoot2y2Zoo

[PAGE 419]
405

Section 11.3. Multiconductor Termination

Figure 11.8. Optimal termination for a pair of symmetric transmission lines.

Note how there is no coupling between the modes since the off-diagonal terms are
zero. The optimal termination network with i = 0 requires that y; = 1/Ze and
y2 = (Zoe -- Zo0)/(2Z0eZo0). The resulting schematic is shown in Figure 11.8.
Differential pairs are not typically terminated with the network in Figure 11.8,
so it is interesting to investigate the reflections generated from imperfect termination. Three common termination schemes are shown in Figure 11.9, along with
the hookup for the differential receiver. These terminations are discussed in the

following sections.

Bridged Termination

As shown in Figure 11.9a, a common termination scheme for differential pairs is
a single resistor bridging the lines, so y; = 0 and yo = 1/(2Z%,,). From (11.5) the

modal reflection coefficients are

and it can be seen that bridged termination leads to. = +1 and I, = 0. The odd
mode is completely absorbed, while the even mode is completely reflected. Since the
signal is carried in the odd mode and the differential receiver rejects the even mode,
extra noise on the even mode caused by bridged termination is inconsequential as
long as the even-mode noise does not couple into the odd mode through mode

conversion.

[PAGE 420]
90Fr

2 Lop

Figure 11.9, Imperfect tennination for a differential transmission line pair: (a) bridged, (b) single-ended, (c) AC.

[PAGE 421]
407

Section 11.3. Multiconductor Termination

Single-Ended Termination

As shown in Figure 11.9b, the two transmission lines can be individually terminated.

With y, = 1/Zo0 and yz = 0, the modal reflection coefficients from (11.5) are

Zoo--Zoe
ZootZLoe

0 0

il
3
|

so the odd mode is matched while the even-mode reflection is greatly reduced.
Compared to the bridged termination, the extra damping of the even mode costs
an additional resistor.

Differential drivers often provide single-ended termination. If bridged termination is used at the receiver, then the odd mode is absorbed at both ends for very
good signal integrity, while the driver damps the even mode to keep it from becom-

ing a noise and EMI problem.

AC Termination

The AC termination in Figure 11.9c is a T-network with the impedance matrix

1 1
A Zoo + que jul
i '

1
wo Zoo t+ ZG
using the results from problem 14 in chapter 4. Applying this to (11.1) with

Zoe O
0 Loo

li
I

yields the modal reflection coefficient as

LZoa- Zoet2 whee 0
LootZoe +20

0 0

it
3
II

The odd mode is always matched, while the even mode has a frequency-dependent
reflection coefficient. At low frequencies, !, = +1, while at high frequencies, [, =
(200 -- Zoe)/(Zoo + Zoe) and a large fraction is absorbed. Compared to the bridged
termination, even-mode attenuation is added without increasing static power dissi-

pation. However, AC termination requires three components.

[PAGE 422]
408 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

11.4 Power Distribution

Signal integrity in digital systems is directly affected by the quality of the power
distribution system. Noise on the power supply manifests itself as rail collapse and
SSN, with direct impact on noise margins and timing. There are several aspects
of power distribution design, including PCB stackup; bypass capacitor selection
and placement; voltage partitioning; package, socket, and connector selection; pin
assignments, including selection of the signal-to-power and signal-to-ground ratios;
and pin placement. The basic goal in power distribution is to minimize inductance
and resistance while maximizing capacitance over a wide frequency range. Factors
that complicate the design include cost (because excellent power distribution is easy
to obtain with an unlimited budget), size limitations, nonideal component behavior
(especially for capacitors), limits on pin counts, limits on the signal-to-power and
signal-to-ground ratios, and limits on the layer count of the PCB. This section covers

a few basics of design methodology, component behavior, and modeling techniques.

11.4.1 Target Impedance

The power distribution system must work as a low-impedance source over a bandwidth from DC to several harmonics of the clock frequency. Low impedance is
needed to minimize the generation of noise, but it is also needed to minimize the
radiation of electromagnetic energy and the EMI that would result. One method of
specifying a power distribution system is in terms of a target impedance,! which is
the maximum allowed impedance for the system to meet a specified noise level.
Consider a component operating at a voltage Vpp and dissipating an average of
P watts. The average current is Iavg = P/Vpp. Assuming that the allowed ripple

on the power supply is yVpp, where typical values for x are 5% to 10%, then the

1. This section is based on the work presented in the paper by Larry D. Smith, "Packaging
and power distribution design considerations for a Sun Microsystems desktop workstation," Proc.
IEEE 6th Topical Meeting on Electrical Performance of Electronic Packaging, Oct. 27-29, 1997,
pp. 19-22,

[PAGE 423]
409

Section 11.4. Power Distribution
ection ee eee

target impedance is

Vripple
Zr = PRS
lave

xVBp

p

The power distribution system is designed so that the impedance looking into
the system at the site of the component is less than the target impedance over a

specified bandwidth. The definition of target impedance is sketched in Figure 11.10.

Component oP System

Frequency

Figure 11.10. Target impedance sets the maximum impedance magnitude of the

power distribution system as seen from the position of a component.

11.4.2 Design Overview

The target impedance of a power distribution system can be lowered using several
techniques. The main areas where significant impact can be made are packaging,
the PCB stackup, and bypass capacitors. The subject of regulated power supplies
is beyond the scope of this book.

[PAGE 424]
410 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

Packaging

Packaging components include integrated circuit packages, sockets, and edge connectors. Target impedance is lowered by choosing a packaging component that offers a
shorter connection, for lower partial self-inductance, and/or by assigning more pins
to power and ground connections. The number of power and ground pins should be
equal unless the noise margins at logic low and high are significantly asymmetrical.
The power and ground pins should be evenly interleaved across the component.

The most important design criteria for packaging is the signal-to-ground ratio.
Lower ratios supply better impedance control and lower power-distribution inductance to support faster signaling. For a given signaling speed, different styles of
packaging require different signal-to-ground ratios. For example, a BGA with planes
can get by with a higher ratio than can a simple QFP.

The appropriate signal-to-ground ratio for a given application can be determined
through detailed modeling and simulation of SSN. Good models of drivers, receivers,
and packaging components are required, so the required level of effort is quite high.
In most applications, the ratio is selected through experience with prior versions of
the product or with similar products.

One package style is not inherently better than another as long as enough pins
are available to lower the signal-to-ground ratio. BG.As are often seen in high-speed

applications simply because they have more pins than QFPs.

PCB

The PCB stackup strongly affects the impedance of the power distribution system.
Stackup design is dictated by PCB manufacturing technology, which is itself driven
by cost since the PCB is often one of the most expensive components in a system.
The basic elements of a multilayer PCB are two-sided PCBs called cores, dielectric
sheets called prepreg, and copper sheets. A two-layer PCB consists of a single core
by itself. A four-layer board can be made by laminating copper sheets onto prepreg,

then laminating those onto each side of a core. A six-layer board can be made

[PAGE 425]
411

Section 11.4. Power Distribution

Copper Sheet
$1 - routing layer 1 PrePree
§2 - routing layer 2 Core
G - ground plane Prepreg
P - power plane Copper Sheet

(a)

(b) (c)

Figure 11.11. Possible stackups for a four-layer PCB.

by laminating two cores together with prepreg and then finishing like a four-layer
board. Generally, an N-layer board has N wiring layers spaced by N -- 1 dielectrics,
and N must be an even number to prevent warpage.

High-performance systems require power and ground planes plus routing layers;
therefore, the simplest stackup for these systems is the four-layer PCB, which leaves
two routing layers. The power and ground planes form a parallel-plate transmission

line with characteristic impedance

Mo H
Zo =e (11.6)

(see problem 2 in chapter 2). Product size limits W, the size of the board, while
cost constraints limit the choice of the dielectric constant er (usually to just FR-4).
The main variable under the designer's control is H, the separation between the
planes. The lowest impedance is obtained when the power and ground planes are
back-to-back.

A four-layer board has three possible stackups, shown in Figure 11.11. The

stackup in Figure 11.1la has two problems. First, for a given line width, the charac-

[PAGE 426]
A12 Enhancing Signal integrity Chapter 11

teristic impedance of a line routed on S82 is significantly lower than that for routing
on S1, due to the closer proximity to the planes. Second, the PCB is susceptible to
warping under temperature variations since the planes have a much higher loading
of copper than the routing layers; it lacks symmetry. The stackup in Figure 11.11b
is very common since it provides the lowest power distribution impedance with
uniform characteristic impedance on the routing layers in a symmetric form. The
alternative stackup in Figure 11.11c triples the impedance of the power distribution but provides for radiation shielding (if the planes are not punched full of holes
to mount components) for better EMI control, while also providing symmetry and
uniform characteristic impedance for routing.

If a circuit cannot be routed in four layers, then additional layers must be added
in pairs. The assignment of layers must take into account routability, power distri-

bution impedance, routing characteristic impedance, EMI, warpage, and cost.

Copper Weights

A major option on PCB construction is the thickness of the copper cladding. Thicker
cladding has lower resistance and represents a good choice for power planes. Thinner
cladding supports narrow lines with better width control, so thin cladding is good
for signal layers to obtain higher routing density. Cladding thickness is specified
by copper weight, where a specified weight of copper spread over a lin x lin area
provides a certain thickness. The standard copper weights and their thicknesses are
0.50z (0.72mil), Loz (1.4mil) and 2oz (2.8mil), where Imil=0.00 Lin. The conductivity
of copper is approximately 5.7 x 107S/m.

Bypass Capacitance

High-performance designs require bypass capacitance for four reasons: supplying
current bursts for fast switching circuits, providing an AC connection between power
and ground planes for return currents, controlling EMI, and lowering the impedance
of the power distribution system. For all of these uses, Capacitors connect the power
and the ground planes. The difference between these uses is the size and quality of

the capacitors and their locations.

[PAGE 427]
413

Section 11.4. Power Distribution

To support the peak current needs of rapidly switching circuits, bypass capacitors accumulate charge over the clock cycle, then rapidly discharge during fast
transitions. Power supplies cannot fulfill this role because voltage regulators respond too slowly and because the regulator is typically too far away. The distance
issue is strictly related to the speed of light--the demand for the current must
propagate to the source of the charge and then the current. must propagate back.
Capacitors fulfilling this role should be located very close to the component needing
the current bursts and should be sized to supply sufficient capacity without picking
up too much self-inductance, which limits the ability of the capacitor to quickly
supply the current.

Currents return on the power distribution in such a way as to lower the total
impedance. Low-frequency components spread over every available path to minimize
resistance. High-frequency components crowd under signals on planes to minimize
inductance and bridge from ground to power planes and back, as necessary, through
the capacitive reactance between them. By adding bypass capacitors between the
planes, current can more easily transition between the planes since the reactance is
reduced, so generally, inductance is reduced and signal quality improves. Capacitors
for this role should be located near the power pins of every high-speed component
and should be sized with relatively small values to obtain low inductance.

EMI problems are reduced with a regular grid of capacitors that limits the size
of current loops. The signal and return path form a loop that will radiate, so the
larger the loop, the greater the radiation at a given frequency. By placing bypass
capacitors on a fairly regular grid across a PCB, the size of any return path is
limited by the grid size. Such a placement strategy is not strictly needed but helps
avoid problems from unavoidable flaws in the design. Capacitors in this role should
be evenly distributed and should be sized with relatively small values to obtain low
inductance.

After bypass capacitor placement for the uses just discussed, the power distribu-

tion impedance may still exceed the target impedance. Additional bypass capacitors

[PAGE 428]
414 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

can be added to lower the impedance, and the size and location of the capacitors
depends on the system design. Detailed modeling and simulation can help complete
the design (see section 11.4.4), but due to the complexity of such an effort, it is not
common. Product history and experience are often the only source of help in this

area.

11.4.3. Capacitor Modeling

To avoid overly optimistic results, bypass capacitors should not be modeled as a
pure capacitance. Real capacitors have a frequency response similar to the one in
Figure 11.12, based on a series RLC circuit. Capacitors have series inductance and
resistance due to contacts and the spatial dimensions of the capacitor plates. The
inductance of mounting pads and vias are also Significant and should be included

in the capacitor model.

100
GS 10 0.012 0.1nH 100 uF
a
E
= ;
op
i]
=
3
3 0.1
A
0.01
0.001

Frequency, Hz

Figure 11.12. Example frequency response of a bypass capacitor modeled as a

series RLC circuit.

[PAGE 429]
Section 11.4. Power Distribution 415

The series RLC circuit resonates at the frequency
1
fo = mnVEC
Like all resonators, the impedance at the resonant frequency is purely resistive.
Capacitors can be specified by providing the capacitance, the series resistance at
resonance, called the effective series resistance (ESR), and f,. Given these, the
effective series inductance (ESL) can be found.

Smaller capacitors have lower inductance along with lower capacitance, so the
resonant frequency is higher. Therefore, small capacitors are more useful for EMI
and return path management. For supplying burst currents and for lowering ZT, Capacitors with larger capacity are needed; however, the lower self-resonant frequency
can limit their usefulness. It may be necessary to use several smaller capacitors in
parallel to increase capacitance while taking advantage of the higher f,. (Note that
N parailel capacitors have total capacitance of N x C and total inductance of L/N,
so the resonant frequency (in radians) remains unchanged at 1//LC).

The parallel-plate capacitor formed by the power and ground planes in a multilayer PCB has a very low ESR and ESL while providing moderate amounts of

capacitance. This capacitor is very effective in all of the bypass capacitance roles.
11.4.4 PCB Modeling
A simulation of the impedance of a power distribution system should include

1. The geometrical structure of the PCB

2. Component placement

3. Passive component models including resonance behavior

An effective and straightforward approach to achieve items 1 and 2 is to subdivide
the PCB into small sections of transmission lines, as shown in Figure 11.13. Each
subsection is a parallel-plate waveguide with the characteristic impedance given by

(11.6) and phase velocity c,/,/é-, where co is the speed of light (3 x 10®m/s) and e,

[PAGE 430]
416 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

|e
"Lda UL LI 5

(a)

(c)

Figure 11.13. PCB power distribution system modeling through subdivision into
transmission lines: (a) original PCB with components, (b) PCB marked for subdi-

vision, (c) transmission line model.

is the dielectric constant of the PCB material. Actual transmission line models can
be used in the simulation (which would be very slow), or the sections can be made
small enough so that the lumped approximation holds and a network of resistors,
inductors, and capacitors can be used.

Once the PCB has been gridded, component models can be added to account for
packages, sockets, and bypass capacitors. The impedance !ooking into the model at
the site of the components is computed and plotted, as in Figure 11.10, from DC to

the upper frequency of interest to check for satisfaction of the target impedance. If

[PAGE 431]
417

Section 11.4. Power Distribution

the plot does not satisfy the 47 specification, then component lecations and values
can be modified.

One of the reasons this technique is so effective is that the inductive coupling
between transmission line subdivisions is negligible, and the capacitive coupling is
zero, since all of the sections are shorted together. An extension of the technique to
include signal-line routing would need to reintroduce coupling, which dramatically
increases the complexity of the method.

An example calculation using this methodology is shown in Figure 11.14. The
PCB is a four-layer board 1.6mm thick, so the power and ground planes are separated by 0.533mm. Assuming a dielectric constant of 3.4, then the wavelength
at 500MHz (representing 5x a 10Q0MHz board-level clock) is 0.325m. Limiting the
transmission line lengths to 3.25cm allows them to be approximated with lumped
components. To obtain sufficient granularity to locate components, the transmission
line segments are sized to 5 x 5mm?. A 10 x 20 grid of these models a 5 x 10cm2
PCB. The characteristic impedance of each 5mm transmission line section is 21.80.
leading to lumped component values of L=0.67nH and C=1.41 pF, using chapter 2.
equations (2.14) and (2.15). An AC frequency sweep in SPICE enables the calculation of the impedance looking into the board at component sites, and the figure
provides sample results. This simulation shows a reduction in peak impedance from
almost 10002 to about 12 over the bandwidth of DC to 500MHz. A full-scale problem would include a full-size shaped PCB with all capacitor and component, models

in place and a good power supply model.

11.4.5 Core Noise Modeling

Off-chip drivers can create substantial noise on the core logic's power supply. This
interaction cannot be directly simulated because cores have far too many transistors
to simulate in SPICE. The core must be modeled to enable simulation.

A large digital component like a microprocessor is essentially a sea of switches

(the transistors) in parallel with tiny capacitors (mostly gate and nwell capacitance

[PAGE 432]
"dOd ,UHOT x ¢ & 10; uoWeUrxosdde

peduny] OT ue Suisn Sulepou uraysds "OTN! 1jsIp Jamod ajdwexgq 'FTL oan31q

iD usde

PUREE EPEC SPO PPPEr ee

Borer rererrrecer

er cccee coor ecceeree
PEE SEE EP EEer PE Serer

TT 4aideyD «= AquaSaquy peuSig Buioueyug

[PAGE 433]
419

Section 11.4. Power Distribution

in CMOS). The switches operate over the course of a clock cycle, either charging
or discharging the capacitors. The current supplied to or from the capacitors is
supplied from two sources: on-chip capacitance not involved in switching (not all
transistors switch at every clock cycle) and the power supply. Therefore, a reasonable
model of the microprocessor suitable for system-level signal integrity simulations is
a capacitor in parallel with a current source. This model is a Norton equivalent for
the core.

A Norton equivalent model requires the capacitance of the core and the current
profile of the source. The capacitance can be estimated from layout and process
information, or it can be estimated from average power dissipation. As shown in

chapter 1, equation (1.1), the average power dissipated in capacitive loads is
P=CV?f.

The power can be measured by monitoring the supply current and voltage. Knowing
the power, supply voltage, and clock frequency, then the capacitance is

C= aa
For example, a core dissipating 5W at 500MHz with a 1.5V supply has approximately 4.4nF of core capacitance if all circuits are active all the time. Usually,
much of the core is inactive on any given clock cycle. If on average 10% of the
core transistors are active at atime, then the actual core capacitance is 10x higher
than that predicted by average power dissipation. Continuing the example, for 10%
switching activity, the core capacitance is actually 44nF.

The current profile for the Norton equivalent is much more difficult to estimate
than capacitance, yet it is key to good simulations. A zero'th-order model can be
constructed by assuming that the current ramps from zero to a peak, then back
down during the course of a clock period, as suggested in Figure 11.15. Integrating

the instantaneous power over a clock cycle yields the average power delivered by

[PAGE 434]
420 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

I max

Core Current

Time

Figure 11.15. Simple model of current draw for a large core.

the power supply at voltage V as
1 7
Pavg = T | Vi(t)dt
1

= 9 Imax.

The average power dissipation is used to fill out the model. For the example in the
prior paragraph, the average current is 3.33A, so the peak current is 6.7A. Since the
clock period is 2ns, the current slew rate is 6.7A/ns. The core's intrinsic capacitance
supplies the very high edge-rate current while the power supply recharges the core
capacitance at a much lower slew rate.

A Norton equivalent model of the core can be incorporated into a system level
simulation by tying the model across the on-chip power and ground rails. Modifying the schematic in chapter 3, Figure 3.2 to add a Norton equivalent yields the

schematic in Figure 11.16.

11.5 Advanced Packaging

There exists a huge variety of package styles, and when it comes to electrical performance, there is a natural tendency to try to rank the various styles from best to
worst. However, it can be stated unequivocally that no package style has inherently
higher performance than another. Rather, for a given application and its contraints
(size, pin count, die size, reliability, and cost), one package may be a better electrical

choice than another.

[PAGE 435]
Section 11.5. Advanced Packaging 421

Norton Equivalent
Core Model

e)
Ly _ Y
-oLe SS °
Driver 2 Ls
oO

On-Chip -- Package /-- System =

Figure 11.16. Simple system-level schematic with a Norton equivalent model of

the core logic.

The fundamental issue is the number of power and ground pins that can be
assigned. Package inductance can always be lowered to achieve better electrical
performance by assigning more pins to power and ground. Pads can be added to
the die until there is no more room, at which point the die must grow in size to
accommodate more pads. At this point the die is said to be pad limited. Larger
die are dramatically more expensive, so little to no die growth is normally allowed.
Packages can accommodate more pins by growing in size with relatively little impact
on cost, but larger packages can tolerate fewer thermal cycles, so reliability issues
set an upper limit on package size, and hence on pin count.

Once the pin count is limited, higher performance can be achieved only through

advanced packaging techniques to lower the inductance. These include packages

[PAGE 436]
422 Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

with ground and/or power planes, area array packages (depending on design), and
flip-chip die to eliminate wire bonds. Advanced packaging adds considerable cost
without adding any inherent value to the silicon product--customers pay for functionality, and the best packaging can do is to not limit performance.

There are a few basic rules for the electrical design of packages. All connections
should be as short as possible, and the order of importance in layout is ground,
power, clock, asynchronous lines, fast digital lines, and finally, slow digital lines.
Generally, the number and quality of power connections should equal that of the
ground. Planes should not have any slots. The number of power and ground pins
is determined by the ratio of the number of fast. signals to the number of ground
pins. The signal-to-ground ratio is typically set by experience with the product line
or similar products. As clock speeds increase, the required ratio decreases. Detailed
simulations can be used to explore the impact of the signal-to-ground ratio on new
products and on products expecting either a large jump in speed or a redesign into

lower-cost packaging or interconnects.

11.6 Exercises

1. For a differential driver swinging rail-to-rail with impedance R, derive the
static power dissipations for the optimal, bridged, and single-ended termina-

tion schemes in section 11.3.2. Which dissipates more power?

2. Derive and sketch an optimal multiconductor termination scheme for the

three-conductor transmission line described in chapter 10, problem 10.

3. LVDS uses current-mode signaling with differential detection of the voltage

drop across the 1002 resistor in the following schematic.

The current source provides +2.5mA for logic one and zero, respectively. Use
even- and odd-mode analysis with the modal currents to find the detected

voltage under the influence of common-mode noise.

[PAGE 437]
423

Section 11.6. Exercises

4.

(a) Show that the reflection coefficients for the even aud odd modes of a
symmetric differential pair are
1

T Lo ~ Zoo
° Zo + Zoo

I

Pe

when using bridged termination with an impedance of 2Z,, where Z, =
efe.
(b) How does this result compare to using bridged termination with 220?

(c) For bridged termination with 2Z,, find I', for M -- 0.1L and Cy, =0.1C

for the differential pair. Is this level of reflection acceptable?

5- A waveform is launched on the even mode of a symmetric differential pair

towards an unbalanced 7-network termination with yi # yz and yo = 0 (see
chapter 4, Figure 4.8a). What is the voltage detected by a perfect. differential

receiver?

. Derive a T-network that optimally terminates a symmetric differential pair.

. A fully-cladded PCB forms a cavity that can resonate at high frequencies. If

one entire edge is driven, the PCB acts like a low-impedance transmission line

with input impedance
Zin = --JLZo cot( 3d)
for the lossless case.

(a) Compute the fundamental resonant frequency plus 2 harmonics of a
square PCB that is 10cm on a side with dielectric thickness of 0.5mm.
Assume that the dielectric constant is 4 and that the PCB is driven along

one full edge.

(b) Use the technique in section 11.4.4 to build a model of the PCB, assuming
the PCB cladding is 0.502 copper (0.184m thick) with o -- 5.7.x 10°S/m.

[PAGE 438]
A2ZA Enhancing Signal Integrity Chapter 11

Compute the input impedance while driving one full edge, and plot the

result vs. frequency over a sufficient range to cover the fundamental plus
2 harmonics.

(c) Compare the computed results for the resonant frequencies to the ana-

lytical results and explain any differences.
(d) What are the ESR and ESL for the capacitor model?

(e) If the PCB is driven at only one point along the side, what happens?

[PAGE 439]
Appendix A

SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED
PROBLEMS

Chapter 2

2. The capacitance per-unit-length, neglecting fringing fields, is c = ¢,¢€,W/H.
The phase velocity is v, = 1/ Vee = 1/,/€r€o/4o. Solving for & yields the
required result. Solve for Z, by finding ,/2/c. Note how ¢ does not depend on

the dielectric constant.

3. (a) From (2.22) and (2.25), with the load at z = 0, then

V(0)=A+B
and
1(0) = +(A ~B)
=F
sO
V(0) A/B+1
Leal = Lo--77----_
I(0) A/B-1
leading to
AZ -4,
Bo Z,4+Z,

425

[PAGE 440]
426

(b)

4, (a)

Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

The input impedance is

V(-d) _ ,, A/Be™? +e7%4
I(-d) °° A/Bev4 -- e~ 74"

Zin =

Substitute for A/B, multiply through by 2; -- Z,, and collect terms to
get
Zn, = Z, Zr (e714 + e° 77) + Zo(e74 -- en)
; Zo(evt + e- 74) + Zr (e714 -- e-74)
Then, note that tanh(z) = (e" -- e~*)/(e* +e7*) to get the final result.

Substitute y = a + 738 with a = 0 and tanh(jz) = jtan(z) to get the

result.

At low frequencies, the capacitor looks like an open circuit, so lowfrequency components of the incident wave are reflected with a reflection coefficient of [ = +1. At high frequencies, the capacitor looks like
a short circuit, so these components pass through unchanged. Therefore,
the reflected signal is a low-passed version of the incident wave, while

the transmitted signal is a pulse.

[PAGE 441]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems

(b) Results from a SPICE simulation:

@) @)
_-- ; |

J \ 50Q 50Q 50Q 10pF502
0 Oe tom |

Ins Ins 10ns 10ns 5ns 2 50Q

Incident Pulse Reflected Pulse
--_--_____> <----______.

Voltage, V

Due to Rising
Edge

: : Due to Falling
1: Edge

ee
Transmitted Pulse

0 10 20 30 40

Time, ns

427 --

30

5. The current is continuous through the series capacitance, so vj' --v> = vf. The

voltage across the capacitor is vf + vy -- vg , so applying the voltage-current

relationship for the capacitor yields
d ~
vy = ZoC (vy +vyz -- vp).

Eliminating vy yields

where 7 = 2C'Z, is the time constant for the discontinuity. Taking the Laplace

transform and solving for V;" gives

yt.
2 st+1/r'

[PAGE 442]
428

Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

so inverse transforming finds the transmitted pulse as
vp =e /T u(t),

which is a positive pulse for a rising edge. The reflected waveform is

vp =vp --ve = (1 ~e7/ u(t).
The total voltages are

vy =vf tu, = (2--e7*/)ult)
and

vg = vp =e /Tu(t).

For weak reflections, vf >> vf, so

d dut
= Ta (vy vy) © TH

wat
U9

Note that problem 4 does not involve a weak discontinuity, so the estimate
of this formula for a transmitted voltage of 1V is significantly off from the
simulated value of about 0.6V. For a discontinuity of 1pF, both SPICE and

the approximate formula predict 0.1V transmitted pulses.

6. (a) At low frequencies, the inductor looks like a short circuit, so low-freg-

uency components of the incident wave are reflected with a reflection
coefficient of [ = --1. At high frequencies, the inductor looks like an
open circuit, so these components pass through unchanged. Therefore,
the reflected signal is an inverted, low-passed version of the incident wave,

while the transmitted signal is a pulse.

[PAGE 443]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems A429
Appendix eee ee

(b) Results from a SPICE simulation:

@ @
YG 6ns | |

r\ 500 502 502 50
0

Ins Ins 10ns 10ns 5ns 2500
~ 25nH =

Incident Pulse
_

--_ oo
Transmitted Pulse

on

Due to Falling

Due to Rising
Edge

Voltage, V

Reflected Pulse
--<--_--_____

0 10 20 30 40 50

Time, ns

The large amplitude of the pulse transmitted through the shunt induc-

tor shows that a good short circuit to ground can require a very low

inductance connection.

7. Voltage continuity means that vf + vy = vf. The current into the inductor is

vt /Zo-- v; /Zo -- vz /Zo, 80 applying the voltage-current relationship for the
inductor yields

L

+4
Vv =
2 Zo

(vy -- vy -- vp).

=| &

Eliminating v, gives

d
vf =r L(t -- uf),

[PAGE 444]
430 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

where t = 2L,/Z, is the time constant of the discontinuity. The form for vz

is the same as for problem 5, so the results are

vg =e-*/Tu(t),
vy = uf -- of =-(1-e/)u(t),

vy =f +p =e /T ult),
and

vg =vz =e /Tu(E).

For weak reflections, vf >> ut, so

d + dv}
vy = Tur -- Vz) are

Note that problem 6 does not involve a weak discontinuity, so the estimate
of this formula for a transmitted voltage of 1V is significantly off from the
simulated value of about 0.6V. For a discontinuity of 2.5nH, both SPICE and

the approximate formula predict 0.1V transmitted pulses.

8. Plotting the voltage at the receiver computed with SPICE for a number of

driver strengths yields

Voitage, V

or BMY BB tH ~

'
--

t
to

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

Time, ns

[PAGE 445]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems

10.

431

where a running 1V offset is applied to separate the curves. For low-impedance

drivers, the driver is able to launch a strong pulse, but it also strongly reflects,

with a reflection coefficient near -1, the full strength signal returning from the

end of the unterminated line. As the driver strength drops, the initial pulse

amplitude decreases, as does the magnitude of the reflection. At a driver

strength of 509, the amplitude is halved, but there are no reflections, so signal

quality is maximized. This is the source termination case. As the impedance

increases, the initial amplitude continues to drop and reflections pick up again,

this time with a reflection coefficient of +1. Eventually, the driver is unable

to launch a pulse with significant amplitude.

(a) The voltage at the source divides on the source resistance and the trans-

ee"

mission line impedance. The launched voltage is Bata +R: This voltage

arrives at the small load and doubles. For first incidence switching, this

voltage must equal 2, so it is required that 2 = 2-5 aa - FR: Solving for R

yields the source impedance as 28022.

For second incidence switching, the wave reflected from the load travels
back to the source, where it is reflected with the reftection coefficient
I = (R---70)/(R+ 70), so the wave amplitude heading back towards the
load is I. 5-70/(70+ R). At the load, this wave is fully reflected. The
total voltage at the load is the sum of all four waves, and this must equal
2V. So, 2 = 570k +9 STOR + (R -- 70)/(R+70)-5-70/(70+ R) + (R-
70)/(R + 70)-5-70/(70+ R). Solving for R yields 8.892 and 5519. The
largest impedance is then 5519.

11. A 70 transmission line 5ns long with a 5pF load is driven by a voltage source

that rises from 0 to 5V in Ins and holds there. The voltage source is connected

to ground through a 5nH inductor. The source resistance is variable. Plotting

several quantities of interest yields the plots:

[PAGE 446]
A32

12.

Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

Current at Transmission Line Center, A
0.1 - - "Le
LCA,
i]
'|

Vii .
0 , f
0.05 a ~
0.)

Voltage at Transmission Line Center, V

owt

60
50
280 140 3 2.0 280 140° 59 50 © ee
8 GS Soe 10" os nS gage AY
Sour rae Source Resicr, 4.375
C€ Resistance, Q Stance, Q
On-Chip Ground Voltage, V Driver Power we Ww
Vetage p,
oa - OM .
ay tt on "er Dissipation
NSC CNN a
') oe 0 9
we

!

Sess soso
Seto hie Ome hols
ally
A
i=a)
o
J
a
oo
o

50

0 5 ar ae 49 .
280 a rn 40 oo" 280 4p 70 ; Hy oe
3 10 or 35175 10 aN

8.75 4a75 9

5 195 375 Q
--. Oource Resistance, Q

Source Resistance Q

From problem 10, the maximum source resistance for first incidence switching
is 2802. From the plots, dropping the resistance below this value has the
following effects: voltage rises more rapidly and then begins to ring, but timing
is not affected because all reach 2V at the same time; capacitive crosstalk is
worse because of the higher voltage swings in a given amount of time; inductive
crosstalk is worse because of the higher current swings in a given amount of
time; SSN is worse because the voltage drop across the shared ground is
larger; and the total and average power dissipation is constant (note that the
waveforms have not completely settled for the lowest source impedances), but

the instantaneous power required peaks at the source-matched condition.

The voltage launched onto the transmission line is 3-75/(75+ 150) = 1V. After
10ns, this wave arrives at the load, where it is fully reflected with a reflection
coefficient of +1. After 10ns, the reflected wave arrives back at the source and
is reflected again with a reflection coefficient of (150--75) /( 150+75) = 0.3333,
so the wave traveling back towards the load is 0.3333V. After 10ns, this wave
arrives at the load, where it is fully reflected. At 3ons, the reflected wave is

half way back towards the load. A bounce diagram and waveform sketch is:

[PAGE 447]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems 433
AP Ee oe ee

Source Load

N

At Load

At Source

Voltage, V
fom) --
Due WN Uw

2
S

20 30 40

Time, ns

13. Assuming the data is launched on the rising edge, the DDR clock must be
shifted 90° or doubled in frequency to enable clocking in the data in the center of the eye. The use of either a DLL or a PLL introduces some jitter into
the timing. The clock and data lose additional synchronization due to de-

lays introduced by crosstalk and differences in propagation delay. The timing

diagram is
>| P = --
DDR CLK a ae
= =< 90°
90° Shifted DDR CLK S\N f NS"
Sample on Rising and Falling Edges tt Implement One

CLK (Inverted 2X DDR CLK) \_/ \_/ \/ \/ \/

Sample on Rising Edges

DATA XXX FX >*h

The requirement on the setup time for a 50% duty cycle clock is
P/2 > tgs + Atror + Atjitter + Atmargin:
The hold time constraint is symmetrical to the setup time constraint, so

P/2 > ty + Atror + Atjitter + Atmargin:

[PAGE 448]
434 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

14. Inserting the far-end crosstalk from (2.61) into the approximation for the
skew in (2.65) causes the derivative to approximately cancel. The skew is
then approximately independent of the edge rate.

15. (a) Set Z, = 0 in (2.67). A plotted result is

20
15

10

10

z e| £ z
15 5 3 77 3
-20

1.5% 2 2.5% 3K

Bd

16. Because of the limit operation as the size of the section is reduced to zero, the
order of the elements in the lumped model is not significant. The results for

the transmission line equations are unchanged.
18. The voltages and currents at the junction are related by
up tun = u(t) + Un ay + Un 41)

where v(t) is the applied voltage at the junction. For the current,

+ ay + Lan
Un Un _ Ung1 -- Unt
Zon Zon+1

To obtain reflection and transmission coefficients, assume that no wave is incident from the n+1 section, so v;, +1 = 0. Solving for the reflection coefficient

yields

Zo nti _ v(t)
Zon 1 + ot
Zo n+l
Zz +]

T=

[PAGE 449]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems A35
For no reflection, [ = 0 requires that

Zo
v(t) = vt (1 _ pact | .

Zon

19. Using the "O" SPICE element for both lossy and lossless simulations yields

Lossy

Voltage, V

Lossless

Voltage at Source

Time, ns

Lossy
Lossless

Voltage, V

Voltage at Load

10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Time, ns

Up to the 90cm line length, the waveforms are close enough for most. ap-

plications. For longer lines, the discrepancy approaches the trigger point of

receivers and could significantly affect timing.

From (2.37), the maximum length of line for lossless analysis is estimated as

ac 2, [Box
20 V 115 x 19-12 ~ OM

so take d < 50cm, which is in good agreement with the SPICE simulation.

[PAGE 450]
436 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

Chapter 3

4. Voltage measurements across partial inductances are not unique because partial inductance itself is not unique. For this problem, there is no significant
bypass capacitance on-chip, so the rail collapse is due either to ground bounce
from high-to-low transitions or to power droop from low-to-high transitions.
Therefore, the on-chip rail noise provides a good measure of SSN while avoid-

ing measurements across partial inductances.

To obtain three different edge rates, the netlist in Appendix C is run with the
same 182 driver in parallel. The netlist is augmented with a 50Q resistor in
series with the voltage source vin to alleviate convergence difficulties induced

by the parallel drivers. For one, two, and three drivers in parallel, then
0.8
0.7

0.6

"+... Falling Edge (VSS Bounce)

0.5
0.4

0.3
Rising Edge (VDD Droop)

Rail Bounce or Droop, V

0.2

0.1

0.6

Slew Rate, ns

From the plot, faster edge rates cause higher SSN.

5. The three driver setups are simulated with no power supply or signal inductance; the driver simply drives a 50pF load. The edge rates for the three
setups are 1.97ns, 1.03ns, and 0.73ns. The driver impedance is computed by
assuming that t, = 2.2RC, where C = SOpF'. The driver impedances are
then 17.92, 9.49, and 6.69. For a high-to-low transition, the effective induc-

[PAGE 451]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems 437

tance is 3.47nH, while for the low-to-high transition, it is 2.15nH. Using the
impedances, edge rates, effective inductances, and Vr = 0.85V, then (3.4) is

applied to obtain the following results:

1

0.8

a or: a vvo-..,, Falling Edge (VSS Bounce)

--.... Simulation

", aan)
0.4 "1. Estimate

Simulation ee
'x

Rail Bounce or Droop, V

0.2 Rising Edge (VDD Droop)

0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8

Slew Rate, ns

The estimates are not very good, but the trends are correct. Analytic estimates of SSN are good for spotting trends and for comparison studies. In this
example, note how Lower SSN results for the low-to-high transition due to the

smaller effective inductance.

Chapter 4

==-1

= = ==-l1 = ==-1l =
1. From (4.13), S = (Zk +k)-\(Zk --~k). Noting that (7k +k)? =
sSo-l = = =
(Zk +k) because Z is symmetric and k is diagonal (so it is symmetric, and

multiplication is commutative), then

I
[is
a
|
all
Nl
||

== =T--T = =
where the relationship (A B)" = B A is used. For symmetry, S = 3. sO

ss-1 = =>s=-1 = s==-l = =s=-t =
(24k --k)\(Zk +k) =(Zk +k) Zk k) is required. Multiplying

[PAGE 452]
Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

through to eliminate the matrix inverses and expanding, then

(Zk +k(Zk -k) = (Zk -k\ZE +8)
=----i =-------l = =2 ----1 2 =----=-1 = --2
(Zk Y+kZk ~Z-k =(Zk )P-kZk +2Z-

kZk =Z
kZ - Zk,

=== == = = =T =
and since kZ = Zk due to k being diagonal, then S = S_ and S is symmetric.

. From (4.4), the total incident power is P; = 4° |ax|*, while the reflected
power is P, = $5>|b;|?. The total dissipated power is then the difference.
Noting that >> |c,|? = ¢7 -@, then the dissipated power is P = P; -- P, =

ia" -a* -- LAY BY, Since b = Sa, then
1 l= =
P= 5a) a" - 5(8a)" (Sa)
sT =
= 5a a -- aS -S a"
l =_i=
= -a' (I-S 8 )a*

Note that the dissipated power depends on how the network is driven.

. The average power delivered to a port is Pyavg = 4Re[VjI 7]. Using the fact

that Re{z] = am , then Pjave = 4(VjI } + V#J;). Summing across all ports.
--TJ--* --T--* -- aT _, a ee
then Protat = + 0 (VjilZ4+VA;) =A T+ W) = P4777) =

----T' =P =* --x
i (Z +2 YT.

4, The schematic for this problem is

[PAGE 453]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems 439

Note that T, = i The S-parameters relate the waves as

by = Sy1@1 + S\2a@2 = Sj1a; + SiebeTy

bog = So1a1 + Se2a2 = So1ai + SoabeD yp.

From the second equation, b2 = as, then the first equation yields 6; =

Sia, + SyoP 1 SBS, or P= Sy, + PeSabu,
7. Introducing traveling waves, with @ and 6, at ports 1 to N on Si, @2 and by
at ports N +1 to 2N on 51, and @3 and 63 at ports N + 1 to 2N on 52, then

the original S-parameter matrices relate the traveling waves according to

b; _ Si A Sy B a

ba Sic Sip a2
and

a2 _ SoA Sop bo

bs Sec Sap a3

Expanding, these provide four equations in four unknowns. Eliminate first be

and then G2 to get

by = (Si4 t+ Sia(T _ 5245p) 'S2a51c)ay
+ (Sip(I- S245ip)~'San)as
bs = (S2cSic + S2oSip(t -- S2451p)~*S2451c)ay

+ (Sap + SecSip(I --~ S245) p)7'S2p)as.

Tall Tall

Similarly, eliminate G2 then 62 to obtain

14+ SipSe2a (I ~ SipSea)!Sic)a1
1BS2a(T - S1pS24)~'S1pSon + Sip Sop )ay
Soc(T - SipSea)~'Sic)ay

(Soo(T -- S1p524) Si pSoR + Sop )az.

Tal

i =

Tl

+

a
I
--,

+

[PAGE 454]
Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

440

Both results are equivalent, with slightly different forms. The final result comes

from pulling Sa, Sa, and Sp from the first result and Se from the second.

= =T =
If the networks are reciprocal, then Sc should equal Sj. Noting that Sic =

Sip, Sac = Sop, Soa = So4, and Sip = S,p, then it can be easily shown
= =T
that So = Sp.

8. Let the voltages and currents be assigned as shown below:

Then the Y-parameter matrices can be expanded as

Ts _ Y, A Y, B Vi

Ts Yic Yip V2
and

Iq _ Yoa Yop Vi

Ig Yac Yop V2

Then Kirchhoff's current law requires

--
an
|
bees |
w
ioe

+ 14

1AV1 + YispVe + YouVi + YosV2

'Il

5+ Ig

o
|
Ilo!

icVit+ YipV2 + YooV; + YopVo.

Collecting terms and assembling into an array yields the desired result.

[PAGE 455]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems

441

9. Set up the six equations describing the problem as

Vi
V2
V3
V4
V2
In

and eliminate V2, V3, [2 and Js.

Ait, + Ziale
Zit, + Zoele
43313 + Z3al4
24313 + Zag]
V3

--Is

10. Assign the traveling waves as shown below,

and since the characteristic impedances of the lines are matched to the port

impedances, then

be

e791

0 van 0
e--J02 wee 0
a2
0 e--76Nn
0 0
e 82, 0 7
bi.
8) ons e JON

[PAGE 456]
442 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

Since 6, = 5}, then

i nn | a) e 7 I%1 0 wee ?)
0 ei ... 0 ok 0 e392 _
by = a2
0 QO .-- e@n 0 0 wee @ ION

Inverting the diagonal matrix yields the desired result.
11. (a) The voltage and current on a lossless transmission line are

V(z) = Vte7I? 4 yo elh2

T(z) = yo(Vte 2? -- V~ 8),
Let port 1 be located at z = --é with voltage and current
Vi = Vite! 4 Vo e388
and
Ty = yo(V ter? -- V~ 988),
Let port 2 be located at z = 0 with voltage and current
Vg2=Vt+V-
and
Iz = yo(-V"+V~),

where the current is reversed to take into account that positive current
enters the DUT for an admittance matrix. As in problem | in chapter 2,

solving these two for V+ and V7 yields

yte V2 - 2ole
2
and
Y- -- V2 + Zol2
37 .

[PAGE 457]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems A443
Appendix A solutions to >e nee

Eliminating V+ and V~ from the equations for port 1 and solving for
the currents yields the desired result.

(b) Substitute 6 = --7y in the prior result and use the identities cos(jr) =

cosh(x) and sin(jz) = gsinh(r).
12. Use the given matrix in (4.8) with Z, = 50 and invert to obtain

= --70.00101307 +70.0143216
+0.0143216 -- 70.00101307
From problem 11,

= --0.070737 1
Y = 70.0143216
1 --0.070737

so Y,sin(8d) = 0.0143216 and cos(@d) = 0.070737, leading to Gd = 1.5 and
Y, = 0.014358 or Z = 69.652. From (2.24), 6 = w,/€egr/Co, 80 solving for the

effective dielectric constant yields €.g¢ = 4.

13. The short-circuit admittances at port 1 can be found as

vi

y1 = >
Yi Vo=0
I,

¥Y21 = FS .
Vi lys--o

The short at port 2 shorts out y3, leaving y; in parallel to yo. y11 is just the
input admittance, and since parallel admittances add, then y,; can be directly

written down as

Yul = yi + Ye.

The current at port 2 is found by the current divider as

Y2
yr + Yo'

Inp=-h

where the negative sign is needed since positive current flows into the ports.
Divide through by V; and substitute for y,; and y2;. The remainder is filled

in by observation due to symmetry.

[PAGE 458]
444 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

15. Since the characteristic impedance is the same in both transmission lines, the
voltage traveling waves can be represented directly by a and b. Match port 2,

then az = 0 and Sj; and S$; can be found. The voltage is continuous across

the capacitor, so

ay + b, = bo.

The current through the capacitor is

1 l 1
juC'bg = Zz, 0 7," ~ 7,2

where bz is the voltage across the capacitor. Eliminate bz to obtain $1, =
b, /a;. Eliminate 6; to find S2; = b2/a,;. Symmetry then provides Sj. and
S29.

Chapter 5

2. The partial mutual inductance is defined in (5.47), where the numerator of
the integrand is dé - dé. If these two vectors are orthogonal, then ae -dé=0,
so M, = 0.

3. Define the various vectors as

"a

Fr = £2

Foor (cos 6£ + sin 67)

[7 --F| = y/(r' cos@ -- x)? + (r' sing)?
dé = dré
ae = dr' (cos 6f + sin 0g)

dé -df = cos Odzdr ,

then the partial mutual inductance from (5.47) is given by

M -EP Pf cos Odxdr'
° 4m Jo Io V(r' cos 6 -- x)? + (r' sin 8)?

Solution with a symbolic manipulator yields the result.

[PAGE 459]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Probiems 445

4, The partial self-inductances from three legs must be added to the partial

mutual inductances between the legs. Using (5.53) and the results above with

_ lb 26 3
b= 362 In (=) - 4
2

~ gel, f+

cos 60° = 3 then

27 2
Simplification yields the result.

5. The partial self-inductances from four legs must be added to the partial mutual inductance between the legs. Noting that the mutual inductance between

adjacent sides is zero, then from (5.49) and (5.53)
pb 2b 3
b= 4 in ( : ) i|

ub b b\? b\? 2b
45 [In [= + 1+ (3) ~ 1+ (5 4

Simplification yields the required result.

6. From (5.47), the partial mutual inductance between a closed loop and a con-

mae f [ee
p An square J wire jF--F |

The closed integral over the square can be broken into four path integrals as
M, = i [ dé . dé
Ar bottom J wire Ir --fF |
ye al [ a . dé
An left J wire Fr] ---?T '|
y z/ [ de - dé
top J wire |F-F] -T '|
y af [ a dé
right J wire \F-F] ~F |

tour is

[PAGE 460]
446

Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

The integrals with the top and bottom vanish due to orthogonality. The remaining two integrals calculate the mutual inductance between two parallel
straight thin wires with the solution from (5.49). Assuming that this formula
is written as f(é,s), where @ is the length of the two wires and s is the spacing,

then

My = f(a,a +b) -- f(a,6).

. In the gap, Ampere's law requires

Cc Ss
27rHy, = 1
1

Hg = on

Since B = wH, then By = # From (5.15) then

1 b . .
L= a | Oar ------ ay,
i Ja 2nr 2ar
where for external inductance, the integration takes place only over the space

external to the conductors (the field is zero outside the outer conductor).

Completing the integration yields the desired result.

. From Ampere's law, the magnetic field strength produced external to the inner

conductor is
a
Hyg =--.
° Onr
The magnetic field strength produced inside the outer conductor is

1 r? -- p2
A. = ------_ --______
9 lar (6402 ---R"

where the area fraction of the current enclosed by the contour modifies the

magnitude. Note that the sign is reversed because the current direction is

[PAGE 461]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems

12.

447

reversed from the direction in the center. Summing the two produces the

total field inside the outer conductor:

H i 1 rp? -- 5 )
¢ Oar (b+t)? --B2)
Plugging into (5.15) yields
Lou i: ery
>= 7 ~ {| ~--~,--; ] dr,
£ wi), r\(b+t)?-8
where the integration is only over the outer conductor. Completing the inte-

gration yields the desired result.

- Inside the conductor, for uniform current the magnetic field strength is

1 a
= ~~ --_, --_ si.
Hs amr (a+ t)? -- a2

Plugging into (5.15) yields

LC wp petty r? -- g? ;

2a = | ------____ } ar.

£ £ (ata) °
Completing the integration yields the desired result.

The trick is to add a third conductor to the problem to act as the return path
for the two conductors forming the annular coax. The third conductor is a
conductive ring with radius c and thickness t. The value of c is arbitrary as

long as c> b+ t.

The partial self-inductance for the inner conductor is just the inductance for
the annular coax formed from the inner conductor and the added return path.
All of this inductance is assigned to the inner conductor, thereby transforming
it into a partial inductance. The same is done for the outer conductor. The
partial mutual inductance is then defined by the requirement that the loop inductance using the partial inductances must add up to the correct inductance

value:

La, b, t) = L(a,c,t) + L(6,c,t) -- 2M.

[PAGE 462]
448 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

Since the value for c is arbitrary, there are an infinite number of valid par-

tial inductance values for any given geometry, and they all give the correct

inductance.

14. The fields above the plane are identical to the fields of the geometry where
the plane is replaced by an image wire a distance d below the location of the
plane. This problem is just the two-wire transmission line with a; = a2 = a
and S = 2d in (5.55). Take half of the result since the fields actually exist

only above the plane.

15. Simulating with SPICE yields:
11

10.5 Transition

Ae 10
= be
g 2
Oo n
sg 9.5 ss
=|
= 9- a)

8.5

8 0.8
0.0001 0.001 0.01 0.1 I 10

Frequency, GHz

If there is no coupling, then there is no eddy current and R and L are constant.

16. For the mesh with partial inductances, Kirchhoff's voltage law requires
di di di di
--v+I[,--- -M--~M-- --=
Gt an Gt eg =?
For the mesh with inductance,

di
--vu+L--=0
dt
so collecting terms and equating the two expressions provides the required

formula.

[PAGE 463]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems 449

--_--T--
18. First, find 7 JT as

<r
uy
-T
--T-- >) _ - .
TT= . rr) aN
<T
tn
iy iy 11° 19 ane 71 °2N
dg-t, tg-tg +++ tytn
int, IN +12 iN tN
1 0O 0
0 1 0
0 0 1

- - =_--=T
where (tm:in =0, m#n) is used. Then find TT by noting that

=T=

ll
a

4
II

"Ill
P|

Le |
I

lI
mI
|
il
a aa aie |||
"il i
ae,
4
ll

MII
hl!
La
I
=~
Cl
VS
a

Mill
"IIL
I

Sil

[PAGE 464]
450

19.

Solutions to Selected Problems

A2gty + ig

Aziz . lo

dgin + te

AN

Awin |

Anti in

Ante -in

Anin-in

Appendix A

20. (a) Working with a symbolic manipulator, the following are found:

and

Pell |

-1/¥2 1/v5 3/10
T=| 0 -y3f5 2/Vi0

1/V2 1/V5---- 3710
L-M/V3 0 0

0 L--2M/V3 0

0 0 L+/3M

[PAGE 465]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems 451

(b) The circuit must extract modal voltages from total voltages using Uy, =

--=T _ =
T @ and total currents from modal currents using i = T?m. The resulting

schematic follows.

ml
1 +
-f=v
qi.
+
0. LM
+ Vv - 1 +
1 -- Vv
_ji; 1. 3. =
4 'ml 5 m2 io /'™
1m2
+ Vv -

2

a
5
3 +
0 fBime Sims U5 2. L2My/3
fa
5

+

+

+

3

10

J2y

5 2. LW3M
[=

10

(c) All modal inductances must be positive. For M <0, L > -/3M , while
for M > 0, L > 2M/¥V3.

24. R is already diagonal, so no substitution is made. Substitute L = TIT to

[PAGE 466]
452

25.

Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

get

es,

el

II
=H
+
ll
II
|

&|&

Rearrange to get

--T == --\) = T_ = mn
T Ux (7 RT) TF i+ 3S

Noting the modal voltage and current, then
=T==\ _ =d
Tm = (7 RT) im +A

The term in parenthesis is not diagonal since Ris diagonal. Therefore, the
equation does not decouple and a modal decomposition is not available. Another way to look at it is that with no inductance, resistance is diagonal
and the equation is decoupled. With no resistance, a modal decomposition
on inductance can decouple the equation. However, when both are present,

decoupling is not possible.
The voltage drop is
3 = Ri,

and since RF is diagonal, these equations are decoupled and can be solved one

at a time. The instantaneous power dissipated in the kth resistor is
Pr(t) = Reif(t).

The total power dissipated up to time ¢t is
t
E(t) = Ry [ if (r)dr.
--90°
Due to the square, the integral is always positive, so Ey, is positive when R,

is positive.

[PAGE 467]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems

453

Chapter 6

1.

5.

The provided conditions are that v; = 0, v3 = 1, and Q2 = 0 since line 2 is

floating. The relation Q= C7 for the 3 x 3 case is

Qi Ci Ci2 C1 0
0 |= | Cie Cog Co v2
Q3 Ci3 Cog C33 1

The second equation requires that 0 = Cove + C3, or

C23

v= ->
C22"

which is positive because C23 < 0 while C22 > 0 and less than 1 since C22 >

--C'o3. The charges are found by multiplying out the equation, so

_ C120 23
Qi = C13 Con
and
_ C35
Q3 = C33 Coo'

. From (6.3), the electric field is constant between the plates, so v = Ed, where

d is the separation between the plates. With D = €F&, (6.8) provides

1 ad Ww LE v 2
C=5 »
al | i <(5) dx dy dz,

where W and L are the width and length of the capacitor, respectively. Integrating and setting A = WL yields the desired result.

(a) Working with a symbolic manipulator, the following are found:

-1/V2 1/v5 4/3/10
0 ~/3/5 2//10
i/v2 A/Vv5V/3/10

Mil
II

[PAGE 468]
454 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

and
C+ Cn/V3 0 0
\= 0 C+ 20 / V3 0
0 0 C~ /3Cm

(b} The circuit must extract modal currents from total currents using ij, =
=T. . -- --a .
T i and total voltages from modal voltages using t = T'U,,. The resulting

schematic follows.

+
+

(c) All modal capacitances must be positive. Since C > 0 and Cy, > 0, the
first two modal capacitances are guaranteed to be positive. Summing the

second row of the capacitance matrix yields the capacitance to ground for

[PAGE 469]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems 455

the second lead as Cog = C'-- 2C,,. Rearranging and subtracting V3C m.
then C-V3C im = Coo +2Cm--V3Cm > Osince Con > and Cm > V3C m.

so the third modal capacitance is guaranteed to be positive as well.

6. (a) Delete row and column 2 to obtain

= 10 ---1
C=
--1 5)
(b) Invert to get
21 17 (11
eta
= 748 17 49 23
ll 23 41

Delete row and column 2, then invert the result to get
| 41 ---]1
> | 11 21
Chapter 7

1. The impedance matrix to be reduced is given by

R+jwhL jwM, juiMo
Zp = JeuM, R+jwl jwM,
jwMe juM, R+jwkh

Grounding one end of the three branches leaves just one node, so the incidence

matrix is a 3 x 1 array given by

[PAGE 470]
456 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

Because there are no internal nodes, B = 1. Then the equivalent matrix can

be computed as

-1 -1

R+jwhb jwM, juiMs 1
Zeq = 111 | jwM, R+jwL jwM, 1
jw Ms jwMy, R+gwl 1

2. The impedance matrix to be reduced is given by

R+jwkh jwM, jw M3
jwM, R+jwh jwMo
jwMs jw R + jek

N

I

Pp

Taking the node voltages as V; and V leads to the 3 x 2 incidence matrix

1 -1
A=|0 -1
0 -l
Node V can be eliminated using
= 1
B=
0

The equivalent impedance is then given by

1 0 0 R+ jwL jwMy, jwilts
1 O | | ju M, R+ jul jwit,

ju Ms jw, R+jwL

5. At low frequencies, Ampere's law in integral form is

fmam [[T-as

[PAGE 471]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems A57

Assume that the x-direction is horizontal along the conductor's width, the
y-direction is vertical, and the z-direction is the direction of current flow. For
a wide conductor, H is horizontal and constant with respect to x. If the origin
is in the center of the slab, then H is in the --z direction above the slab and
+z direction below. Applying Ampere's law, there is contribution to the line

integral from above and below, yielding
2WH,(y) = 1,

where W is the width of the slab, and 7 is the current in the slab between +y.

Faraday's law in differential form inside a good conductor is

~ OH
Vx J = -op--.
Ot
With J and H only in the z and z directions, respectively, then
OJ, OH,,
= op------.
Oy Pot
Substituting the result from Ampere's law, then
OF; _ op Oi
Oy 2W at

Let 2, represent the sum of the currents from all slabs out to a distance ty,.
With the slabs numbered from the outside in, then in the kth slab

OTe (te-1 -- tk) /Ar---1 ~ (ie --te4i)/Ak _ oH Dig

dy Yk---1 -- Yk -- 2W at'
where Ay = 2Wt;, is the area of the two slabs k at +y,, and t; are the slabs'
thicknesses. Rearranging yields (7.16) with

1
Rk, =-----
ot,

and

Ly = © (Yet ~ Yk).

So, the ladder network is exactly the same, but with different resistor and

inductor values.

[PAGE 472]
458 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A
BOO

Chapter 8

1. The Y;; can be directly measured at port 2 with the IA, with all other ports

shorted to ground. For Yj; = Yj:, short all ports to ground except for ports 7

and 7, then
qi Yu Yi; Vi
Ig Viz Y35 Vo
Invert the matrix to get
1 Yjj3 Ys hy | M
Al -Y¥i; Yi I2 V2

where A = ¥;,Y;; -- Y3. Apply the fact that J) = --Iy = Ineas to get

Imeas | ¥33 + Yiy VY,
A | Yi ~ Yu Vs

Apply the fact that Vineas = Vi -- Ve to get

Ime
Vineas = a (Yi: + 2Y;; + Y;;) :

Then the measured admittance is

A

Yneas = =------>
we Vag + 2¥ig + Yi

or,
ne +. 2
vy . a¥n -¥2
meas --_ .
Yur + 2Yi3 + ¥3;
Since Yj; and Yj; are known from prior one-port measurements, Y;; can be

found.

2. Measurement at ports 1 and 2 produce

1

2, = ----_--_____
u ge (C19 + ChaC20/(Ci2 + C20))

[PAGE 473]
459

Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems

and

1

Z = --
22 ju (Coo + C12C10/(C12 + Cr0))
The bridged measurement yields

1
Zrneas Soon I et
qu (Cy2 + CioC20/ (Cio + C20))

Solve for Z,2, build the 2 x 2 impedance matrix, then invert to get

Cio + Cia --C}p2
--Ci2 Coo + C12

. The perfect VNA measures a, and 61, while aj and 62 exist between the interconnect and the DUT. The traveling waves are related to the S-parameters

of the interconnect by
by Sir S12 ay
bo S21 529 a2
Divide through by the a's, noting that Sija¢ = 6;/a, is the measured re-

flection coefficient and Sii; = a2/be is the actual reflection coefficient, then

eliminating a)/a2 yields

Sur Sum --Su
This formula gives the correction from the measured reflection coefficient
(S11) to the actual reflection coefficient (5,,) if three parameters are known
for the interconnect: $1, S22, and $1259,. Note that it is not necessary to ac-

tually find Sz and S21 separately.

The three unknowns can be found by measuring three known standards. Rearranging the relationship between S11,, and 51,7, yields

$111512S91

Sum = Sy + --------..
1 -- $117,522

[PAGE 474]
460 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

For a short-circuit load, S31, = --1 and
Sims = S11 -

For an open-circuit load, $;;, = +1 and

Si2521
1 -- So2°

Simo = S11 +
For a matched load, $1,;, = 0 and
Siimy = S11-

Solving these three equations yields formulas for $11, So2, and $3252, in terms

of the measured quantities Sj,a¢5, Sjimo, and Si, 42.

4, (a) For the inductance matrix, short all terminals on one side to ground. On
the other side, a two-port TDR can be applied at terminals i and j, with

all others open-circuited. The voltages at terminals i and j are

di; di,
cn rs
and
di; di,
1 Lig tare

The inductances can be found by pulsing terminal i then j, and using
(8.12) and (8.13) to extract the relevant matrix entries. The measurement

is repeated for all matrix elements.

3. The differential equation describing the problem is

di

Ur = Ri +L.

Integrating yields

[. ur(t)dr = [ Ri(r)dr + Li(t).

a --OoO

[PAGE 475]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems 461
PEK A eee Te ee

For large t, i(t) =inc = vo/(Z, + R). Solving for L yields
t
L= ==" | (u- (7) -- Ri(r))dr.
Vo Joo

Noting that i(t) = (v,(t) -- v-(t))}/Zo, then

pa ZBI win (eB) ar-Z [ear

Therefore, the time-dependent profile of the source is required in addition
to the DC value. An open-circuit measurement can yield v,(t). As before, a

short-circuit measurement can be used to de-embed the fixturing.

7. (a) From chapter 2, equation (2.11), the inductance is L = 60*0.1 x 10-9 =
6nH.

(b) S11 = (41 -- Z.)/(Zi + Zo) = (gw6 x 1079 -- 50)/(gw6 x 10-9 + 50). Plug
in w = 27100 x 10° and simplify.

9. For a general 2 x 2 matrix,
-1
a11 G12 1 422 --@12

a21 422 411922 ~ 412421 | -@o, any
From chapter 4, equation (4.8),
| 2 2 | = Zo ( tO}, ] S11 Sia 1 9 }_f Sir S12
221 22 o 41 S21 $22 ol S21. S22

1
_ z0| 1+ 511 Si2 || 1- S41 ~Sy2

S21 1+ Sog --Sa1 1- 522
-- Ze} 14+511 S12 1-- S22 $12
4 S21 1+ S22 521 1 S311
= =| (1 + 311)Q -- Sea) + $1251 2819
4 2521 (1 -- $11)(1 + Soa) + 512521

where A = (1 _ Si) _- S22) _ S999).
Chapter 9

1. Plug the S-parameters into chapter 8, equation (8.5) or into chapter 4, equation (4.8) to obtain

0.1 + 7w5 x 1079 jw2 x 10-9
gw x 10-9 0.15 + qw6 x 1079

Nil
I

[PAGE 476]
Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

462

By inspection, the model for these two leads is

Lead 1 -- AAA --of VV\--
Lead 2 Avr VV\--

012 | Sn
Lead 3

Lead 4 --A\ A VV

0.15Q nH
oO

2nH

Lead 5

Models for the remaining leads will require more measurements.

2. (a)

Vie VE = Ry + ol TP + poMyolk + qwoMy alt
Var -- VP = quMyol? + Rott + qwlolk + qeMosI¥

Visi -- Ve = uM gs It + gw Mo3Ié + Ry Ib + qwLg It

(b) Combining into vectors and matrices, then

VE Ve Ri 0 0 If
Vy |-| VF} =] 0 Re 0 Ik
VE VP 0 O Rs If

3
In Miz M3 IP

+ JY!) Mig Le Moz If

Miz Mo, Ls If

Replacing the vectors and matrices with generalized notation yields (9.2).

[PAGE 477]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems 463

3. (a)

IP -- If = gwCi2(Vi -- Vo) + qwCi3(Vi -- V3) + wlio
If -- 12 = gwCy2(V2 -- Vi) + ywCo3 (V2 -- V3) + guCo0Vo

If -- 13° = qwCi3(V3 ~-- Vi) + wC23 (V3 -- Vo) + gwC30V3
(b) Collecting terms, then

If ~ If = gu(Cyo + Cr2 + Cig) Vi -- gwCyaV2 -- jwC 13 V3
ly -- IF = --poC eV, + yu(Coo + Cia + C23)V2 -- juC23V3

Tf ~ IP = --ywCy3V1 -- gwCo3Vo + ju(C'30 + C13 + Co3)V3.

Combining into vectors and matrices, then

IP IR Cio + Ci2 + C13 ---Ci2 --Ci3 YU
ik - If = jw -Ci2 Cao + Ciz + Cos --C3 Vo |.
Ik if --Cig3 --Cr3 C30 + C13 + C23 V3

Replacing the vectors and matrices with generalized notation yields (9.3).

4. From chapter 2, equations (2.11) and (2.12), L = 15nHf and C = 0.667pF. For
a 7-network, split the capacitance into two 0.333pF pieces. Combining (9.20)
and (2.10) yields the bandwidth limit

0.62 0.62

< On TOF ~ 2x00 x 1979 ~ 987MHz.

f

Using t, = 1/BW implies that the minimum edge rate supported by the

model is Ins.

5. Using t, = 1/BW, the bandwidth requirement is 500MHz. Combining (9.20)
and (2.10) yields the maximum TOF as

0.62
TOF < --=0. ;
< onf 197ns

[PAGE 478]
464

Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

The length of the line is then given by distance=ratextime as

_ 3x 108

d= 0.197 x 10~° = 2.96cm.
J4

. By trial and error on a calculator, Gd = 0.385 to achieve 5% error. Since Gd =

wVled = wVLC, then the frequency limit is w < 0.385//LC, which is a little
more than half the value in (9.20). The iterative impedance concept is rooted
more directly in circuit behavior and leads to a less restrictive bandwidth

limitation.

. To find the iterative impedance, set Zi, = Z, = Z; to obtain

_ 7 4. + Zo tanh(yd)
°° Zo + 4 tanh(yd) |

Multiply through to get
2,4; + 2? tanh(yd) = 2,2; + Z? tanh(ya),

then Z; = Z,. This is a restatement of the well known transmission line
property that the input impedance of a transmission line of any length is Z,

when loaded by Z,.

. Any of the three ports can be grounded for the shorted sample. If port 1 is

grounded and current is applied only to port 2, the voltages at ports 2 and 3

at sufficiently low frequencies are
V2 = gwLele + jwli Ip
and
V3 = gwMo3lo + qwhy Ip.
Similarly, the current can be applied only to port 3 to obtain

V2 = puMoagI3 + qwhy ts

[PAGE 479]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems

465

and

V3 = gwlgls + qwlyfs.

Collecting these results yields the impedance matrix looking into ports 2 and
3 as

Ei, + L2 Ly + Mo3

Z = Ww
Li+ Moz Li+Ls

For the open sample, open port 1 and measure the capacitance, C, at either of

ports 2 or 3 at a sufficiently low frequency. The circuit model is shown below.

L,+L,

Port 1

The original and model topologies are equivalent at low frequencies.

Chapter 10

1.

N i
deiak HS ak ak ik a8"
we bjs* bi, bx an b;s*

N .
aK | Ling (s -- Bi b;)s"
Ox dian bis!

N 4
ak 4 iekt1 (a; _ pe bi) s"
b;, wy, bs?

The numerator is reduced from the bottom.

[PAGE 480]
466 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

N Na.st
ik Ss aed ax 1 dink G18"
SN OT a
ean bjs' be+1 8 De41 8 isk+1 bjs"

ak 1 ike is? -- aan 5 bist
ae 1, Dicegs 48" -- iekt2 poke bis'
bei1 8 nS Snel ne
ae 1 Dimker 48" iekt 5h bi418*
Tr D Sin 0rt s
ap 1 pairen az; -- Be i+) 8" 4 ans
FO Sekt NG By yr EUS TINS

= x
Dati 8 iek41 bjs"

The numerator is again reduced from the bottom.

2. Answer:

3. Let the rational function be
M 1
Y(s) = Lixo US" as"
N a)

then
¥(s +0) = = =Ypo,
bo

where Ync is assumed to be known. Incorporating this information into the

numerator yields

ao + i ais*
io b; s*
Yocbo + 4, ais?
iso bjs" :

Y(s) =

[PAGE 481]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems AGT

Evaluating this equation at P frequencies yields the matrix equation

(B-G)b=A47,

where B and 8 are defined as before, and

8S. sh ++» sh
--_/
A=| 83 8% sf |,
Sp sb sif
f
~ T
a@=[a --- ay],
and
Ypoo 0 0
Yoc 0 0
C=} Yoo 0 0
Ypco O ::- O

isa P x (N + 1) matrix. The matrix equation can be solved with the same

technique as used for (10.40).

4, Let the rational function be

N i
Y(s) = Lied "8 )
vio bj; st

then

Y(s > oo) = i. = ¥x,

where Y. is assumed to be known. Incorporating this information into the

[PAGE 482]
468 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A
cc

numerator yields
_ Dio ais' tans"
0 bs"
yD ais' + bn Yoo 8
Dixo bjs" .

Evaluating this equation at P frequencies yields the matrix equation

I

(B-C)b=47,

where B and b are defined as before, and

2 N-1
1 8, 8} $}
2 N-1
1 s2 8% 82
A = 2 N-1
A= |1 83 83 $3 ;
2 N-1
1 sp 8p Sp
_!
@=[a a an--1 | >
and
0 -. Yosh
O-: Yee
C=|00-:-. Yost
0 0 -:-:- Yosh

The matrix equation can be solved with the same technique as used for (10.40).

5. (a) Multiply top and bottom by cos(@d) to get

_ 7 41008(Gd) + 9Z, sin(8d)
° Zo cos(3d) + 9Z7, sin(@d)'

then using the facts that

Zin

[PAGE 483]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems 469

and

cos(x) = =14 OC WD eet

then Zin becomes

oo 2n yr 7h aa 1

Z Z1(1+ S07, (-1)" ay ~) + 9% 4 (-1)"41 a" -

mn ° id 2n-1
Zo(1 + Ea (-D BAP) + 9Z, OS (It BO

(2n)! (2n--1)!

2n-1
Z,4+ R41 (2:(-1)" Gay + 92,(-1)"*? or)

(2n)!

Z, .
° (3d)2" (Bd}2"--1
Zo+ (Z,(-1)" con + 92,(-1)"t1 on )
This is a rational function in the form of

wy yea bi(Bd)t

(b) Because the series goes to co in the numerator, there are infinitely many
zeros. Similarly for the denominator, there are infinitely many poles.
The implication is that a ladder network would require infinitely many
components to exactly represent a transmission line. In other words,
transmission lines can only be approximately modeled using resistors,

inductors, and capacitors.

(c) Keeping just two terms in the numerator and denominator means keeping

terms through Gd, so

Z,+ 9Z.8d

Zin © Zo 5--->
° Zo + 92,84

[PAGE 484]
470 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

Deriving the continued fraction by applying (10.51) and (10.52) yields

Z = Ze Zs Zr + j4of3d
"Zr, by ° £492,
2
Zo
72 1- (4)
= 7 tea
ZL Zr + 99d
Z? 1
~ 7 Ft
"1 (#4)
L
Z2 1
L 1 2
Zon? +IF Se
(BY KC)
(d) The circuit is
Ry
R, Cy
where Ry, = Z?/Zr, Ro = VAG [1 - (Z5/Z,)?], and Cc; =

(8d)/(Z, [1 -- (Z./Z1)*]). It is interesting to note that the circuit is
passive when Z, < Zy; and active when Zo > Zr. When Z, = Z,, the

input impedance to the circuit is just Z,, as it should be.

6. The minimum rise time is 0.5ns, so initially set the delay of each lumped
section at 0.05ns. The delay of the line is 0.025/(3 x 10°/./9.8) = 0.26ns, so
the required number of sections is 0.26/0.05 = 5.2 = 5. For five sections, the
delay each 0.5cm section is then 0.052ns. From chapter 2, equations (2.11)
and (2.12), the lumped inductance and capacitance are 3.9nH and 0.693pF.
The model is given in the following schematic.

1.95nH 3.9nH 3.9nH 3,9nH 3.9nH 1.95nH

0.693pF | 0.693pF [0.693pF 1 0.693pF | 0.693pF

[PAGE 485]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems A471

7. With @ = % =0, (10.5) and (10.6) become

OF zs
Oz
and
bi __ 5d
Oz ~-- At
Eliminate z to get
OU ..00
Bat = OE

__ = 2==-1 =
Noting that r¢ = TyATy, , where X is diagonal, then

=---1 =-1
Ty 0 =dTy 7

--~-- = i
Oz? Ot
Defining the modal voltage as before, then

OB, _ 2m
Oz sot

represents a set of decoupled equations.

_- ==-=---l
Eliminating v yields a similar equation in i with ¢F = 7; T, . The modal

currents are also defined as before.

The first-order equations can be rewritten as

Dm = 7
Oz mm
and
dim = Om
az

=-1

_ =--l= _ _=
where 7,, = Ty TT; andt, =T, ¢Ty.

Since no special properties are used in the prior derivation regarding 2 and é,
the conclusions also apply to 7 and @ in this derivation. N amely, Fy, and Gy,

are diagonal.

[PAGE 486]
A72 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A
rc

8. Equating the even- and odd-mode phase velocities from (10.24) and (10.25)
yields the required result. Far-end noise is eliminated for symmetric lines in
a homogeneous medium. Stripline and buried microstrip are typical examples

of transmission lines that meet this criteria.

9. From (10.24) and the fact that m/f = cm/e in a homogeneous medium, the
even-mode phase velocity is

1

(€-+ m)(e -- &m)
1

Vle + me -- lem -- Mem
1

Vble-- Mm

A similar derivation shows the same result for the odd mode. Then

Ue. =

€

1 1 le--m 1
--_- Ceo --_-- Cc. =o
vg UG mn up!
and, again incorporating m/ = cm/e,
=_ £m c --c
fe = =
m &€ --Cm €
le --- Mem 0
0 fo ~ Mem

I
Stel a sO a |
: So oie
ode ©

10. (a) Working with a symbolic manipulator, it is found that

_ 1/v3 -1/v2 -1/V6
Ty=T;=|1/V3 0 2p
/v3 1/v2 -1/V6

[PAGE 487]
473

Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems

While not needed, it is interesting to note that

(c~ 2em)(2 + 2m) 0 0
\= 0 (c+ Cm)(2-- m) 0 ,
0 0 (c+ em)(é -- m)

which has two identical eigenvalues, reflecting the fact that the problem
has a high degree of symmetry.

The modal inductances are then found with (10.16) to be

£+2m 0 0
bm = 0 l~m 0 ;
0 0 &--m™m

while from (10.17) the modal capacitances are

C-- 26m 0 0
Om = 0 C+ Cp 0
0 0 C+ Cm

The modal characteristic impedances are
Za = /£+2m
C--~ 2m

Zo2 = 203 =

and

while the modal phase velocities are

7 1
"Pt "Ti+ ime Ben)

and

1

Me 8 Teale P ed

[PAGE 488]
ATA Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

(b) Using
1/Vv3 1/Vv31/v3
7, =T, = -1/V2 0 1/V2
-1/V6 /2/3 -1/V6

along with Ty and T, to convert between total and modal quantities,

the schematic implementing the modal conversion is given below.

<
3
&

Z|

SI

<
5
a

ind

si SI

11. (a) From (10.28), for small Z2 the third term in the denominator dominates
when 22 & 2Zo¢Zoo/(Zoe + Zoo), then
Zoe ~ Zoo

9 ZoeZoo
22

Ryne ®

Rearrange to obtain the given form.

[PAGE 489]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems A75

(b) Substituting the expressions for the weak forms for Zoe and Zo, from

(10.29) and (10.30) yields

pe i+s Atgm/é £ lagm/t
~ c1-bon|e 7 e143 Tite, /e

Kye os
Z ltgm/e y--imse
vii feni fens V Befenl

e(l+ Ln/O0 + 5Cm/C) --(1- sm/£)( -- Cm /C)
Za (1+ im/O( -- im/é)

ple (7 +).

neglecting the second-order term 1/4(m/@)?.

2

1
2
1
2

12. Multiply out the numerator and denominator to get

a1 +a2s° +---+ans2™%7!

bo + 5182 +bgst +---+ bas2'-

Z(s) =

Multiply through to get

Z(s)bo + Z(s)b1s? + Z(s)best +---+ Z(s)bys?™ = ays+age? +---+anys?®--!.

Evaluate at P frequencies, then in matrix form
Bb=Aa,

which is equivalent to (10.40), where

_ T
a= | Qj a2 -:: GaN 5
_ T
b= bo by --: bn ,
$1 $3 . g?N-1
a rr ae
A 3 2N-1
A=| 83 83 --: 83 ;

SP Spo: 8%

[PAGE 490]
Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

and
Z(s1) 2(s1)sf Z(si)st +--+ 4(s1)s7%
Z(s2) 2(s82)s3 Z(s2)s3 --- Z(s2)83"
B=| Z(s3) Z(s3)si Z(ss)s4 «++ Z(s3)83%
Z(sp) Z(sp)sp Z(sp)sp -++ Z(sp)spY
Chapter 11

1. For all cases, the driver holds one output high at Vpp with driver impedance

R, and it holds the other low to ground with impedance R. For the optimal

termination, Vpp has a DC path to ground through the resistance

Req R + Zoell (2Zoe Zoo! (Zoe ~-- oo ) + FllZoe )

2(R + Zoe)(R+ Zoo)
2R+Zoe+Zoo

The static power dissipation is then
Prorignay = VDB2Rt Zoe + Zoo)
UR+ Zoe)(R + Zoo)
For bridged termination, the equivalent resistance is Reg = 2(R + Zoo) for a
static power dissipation of
Vip

Poi ed-DZyp, FS
bridged "" 9(R+ Zoo)

For single-ended termination, the power dissipation is determined by the output holding high, so
Vip

Pain le--ended -- [> -
8 R+ Zoo

Looking at the ratios

P. single-ended

=2
PB bridged

[PAGE 491]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems ATT

and

Poptimal _ 2R + Zoe + Loo
Pi bridged R+Z oe
R+ Loo

R+ Zoe'

both are greater than one, so bridged termination dissipates the least static

power.

2. Plugging the results from the solution of chapter 10, problem 10 into (11.4)

yields
1/V3_ -1/v2 -1/V6 fm oO 0
Y=/1/v73 oO Vp 0 Gn 0
V3 1/v2 -1/V6 0 0 tem
i/V3 1/V31/V8
v2 0 1/72
~1/V6 4/2/83 ~-1/V6
' Yor + 2¥o2 Yoi-Yoo2 Yor -- Yoo
=3 Yor~- Yor Yor + 2¥o2 Yor --Yoo |
Yor - Yor Yor --Yoo Yor + 2¥o0
where
c-- 2¢
y. -- Trt
o £+2m
and

Using the method in chapter 9, section 9.9 for implementing admittance ma-

trices, the following circuit is the optimal termination network.

[PAGE 492]
A78 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

3. The quick answer is that Voaetectea = +£0.0025 x 100 = +250mV since the
receiver rejects common-mode noise. The point of the exercise is to practice

manipulations with modal decompositions.

Call the current on the top wire i; and the current on the bottom wire 22. For
continuity, 7; (¢) = a(t} and i2(t) = --i(t). From chapter 10, equations (10.11)
and (10.20)

- 1{ 11 i(t)

im =
v2) -1 11 | -«e)
0
--V2 i(t)
The odd mode propagates to the far end of the line at the odd-mode phase
velocity, while the even mode picks up noise. At the far end, the modal currents
are
= tnoise
-V2i(t ~d/v.)

Using (10.19), the total currents at the far end are

a 1 1 -1 tnoise

ig v2 14 1 --/2i(t -- d/v,)

75 tnoise + a(t _ d/Vo)

5 tnoise _ a(t _ d/o)

[PAGE 493]
Appendix A Solutions to Selected Problems A79

Using the results from chapter 4, problem 14, the voltage at the load for a

symmetric T-network termination is

V1 50 + 29 z2 7 inoise + a(t -- d/vo)
V2 Zo 50 + 29 a inoise _ a(t -- d/ Vo)

5 (50 + 222 )tnoise + 50i(t _ d/o)
75 (50 + 222)inoise -- 50%(t -- d/vo)

Il

The receiver detects the differential voltage across the resistor, so
Udetected = U1 -- V2 = 1002(¢t _ d/o),

which matches the quick result above. Note how zg 1s left in the termination

network to avoid mathematical difficulties, but its effect drops out in the end.

4. (a) Using (11.5) with y; = 0 and y2 = 1/ (2Z,) yields the required result.
(b) The odd-mode reflection coefficient is not zero.

(c) The odd-mode impedance is

&--m
Zan =
ee CHCm
1~m/eé
1+ m/e

=! 1-0.1

~ VeV1+ol

0.9054/ 4.
Cc

Since Z, = ,/€/c, the odd-mode reflection coefficient is

I

1 -- 0.905
1 + 0.905
= 0.05.

ro =

Since just 5% of the incident odd-mode wave is reflected, a reflection

coefficient of 0.05 is good.

[PAGE 494]
A80 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A

5. The modal reflection coefficient from (11.2) using (10.19) is
-1

_ 1 -1 Yo. 0 y. 0 1 -1
Tm = +
1 1 0 Yo 0 43 1 1
1 -1 1 rn) yi 0 1 -1
1 1 0 YX 0 43 1 1

Multiplying this out yields
(v1 +ys)(Yor -- Yor) -- 2(yiys -- Yor Yoo)

7 (yt + y3)(Yor + Yoo) + 2(yiys + Yoi Yon)'

2Yo2(y1 -- ys)

Dmi2 = ;
(an + ys) (Yor + Yoo) + 2yrys + Yoi Yon)
r _ 2Yo1 (yi _ y3)
me" (yi + y3) Yor + Yoo) + 2(yiya + You ¥on)'
and
Dmoo = (y1 + ys)(--You + Yoo) -- 2(yry3 -- Yor ¥o2)

(yi + y3)(Yor + You) + 2(y1y3 + ¥o1Yo2) |

Mode conversion from the incident even mode to the reflected odd mode is
given by I'3;. For no mode conversion, a balanced load is required with y, = yz.
Otherwise, the reflected odd-mode voltage due to the incidence even-mode

waveform is
vu =T avr,
which is the voltage detected by a perfect differential receiver.

6. From (11.3) with (10.19) and (10.20),

7 _ 1 1 --1 Zoe 0 1 1
2/4 1 0 Zoo -1 1
_ 1 Zoe + Loo Zoe -- Loo
~ 9

Zoe ~~ Zoo Loe + Zoo

[PAGE 495]
ppendix A Solutions to Selected Problems

481

Appendix A _ Solutions toe eh

7.

Matching up terms with the impedance matrix from chapter 4, problem 14

yields

(a)

(b)

Zoe _ Zoo
22 > a
23 => 2)
LA, = Loo -

The cavity is resonant when the input impedance has no reactance. From
the given equation, this occurs when cot (Gd) = 0, or 8d = 17/2+n7. Since
B =w/vp, then Bd = 0.1x 2a f /(3 x 108 / V4}, so the resonant frequencies
are 375MHz, 1.125GHz, 1.875GHz, and so on.

The wavelength at 3GHz is 5cm. For lumped modeling, the maximum
length of each section is 0.5cm, so a 20 x 20 sectioning of the PCB is
required. Assuming parallel-plate formulas with DC current distribution.

the resistance of each section is

1 0.005

= 2------___ --_--___.. = 0.1959
5.7 x 107 0.005 x 0.18 x 1076 ,

the characteristic impedance from (11.6) is

4n x 10-7 0.0005
z.-,/_--_4r x 1077 0.0005 _
°= V4x8.854 x 10-2 0.005 ~ [S548

and the phase velocity is vu, = 1.5 x 10°m/s, so the TOF, or tg, is 33.33ps
(666.7ps/20). From chapter 2, equations (2.11) and (2.12), the inductance
and capacitance are 0.628nH and 1.77pF. Building and running a SPICE

model produces the following result:

[PAGE 496]
A82 Solutions to Selected Problems Appendix A
BOE

367MHz

Refresh Lines
Do Not Count
For Zeros

Imaginary Part in Z'"

108 10°
Frequency, Hz

(c) There are slight differences due to the losses included in the SPICE sim-

ulation.

(d) The total capacitance is C = 400 x 1.77pf=708pF. At resonance, only the
resistance is seen, so the ESR is 0.195 x 20/20 = 0.1950. The ESL can
be computed from the resonant frequency of 375MHz using the lumped
formula w = 1//LC to obtain ESL=0.254nH. Note that the ESL is
considerably less than 0.628nH because the lumped approximation does
not apply at 375MHz. For a small component like a ceramic capacitor,

the ESL will be close to the inductance.

(e) The currents must spread to fill the PCB, so resistance and inductance

increase. The higher inductance leads to significantly lower resonant fre-

quencies.

[PAGE 497]
Appendix B

COAXIAL PEEC
CALCULATOR

#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <stdio.h>

#include <zmatrix.h>
#include <matrix2.h>

#include <math.h>

/*
Requires the Meschach library of mathematical subroutines

available from the netlib2.cs.utk.edu archive.

Computes the resistance and inductance of solid coax as a function of
frequency. The ovter conductor thickness is equal to the radius of the
center conductor less 1%. Uses the PEEC method with the inner and
outer conductors broken down into concentric current rings of equal

thickness.

Fhe program is hard-wired limited to 50 rings for the inner and outer
conductors. Change the array declarations and the count check to

increase.

Once the current has crowded to the inside rings of the inner and outer

conductors, the resistance and inductance values stop changing with

483

[PAGE 498]
484 Coaxial PEEC Calculator Appendix B

frequency. If enough rings are included, then the inductance can
be a close approximation of the asymptotic high-frequency value. However,
the resistance will be completely in error because resistance continues

increasing with a square root dependence (i.e. there is no asymptotic value).

*/

char current_file[8]="i.dat"; /* branch currents */

char voltage_file[8]="v.dat"; /* branch voltages +/

double rho=1.77e-8; /* resistivity of copper */
//double rho=5.7e-8; /* resistivity of molybdenum */

double ring_resistance (double , double >;

double coax (double , double , double );

double annular_coax (double , double , double );

int ring_partials (double , double , double » double , double *,
double *, double *, double *, double *);

complex equivalent_Z (ZMAT **, ZMAT *#);

void main(int argc, char *argv[])
{
int number_of_rings,number_of_frequencies;

double inner_radius,outer_radius,fmin, fmax;

VEC *ring_radii,*ring_R;

MAT *ring_L;

ZMAT *Zp,*incidence;

char syscommand [100] ;

int i,j,k;

double t,a,c,outer_thickness,R1,R2,fmult, frequency, pi;

complex Zeq;

/* get the order of the numerator +/
if (arge != 7)
{
printf ("Usage: coax N Ri Ro fmin fmax Nf\n\n") ;

printf ("where N is the number of rings per conductor,\n");

,

[PAGE 499]
Appendix B Coaxial PEEC Calculator 485

printf ("Ri and Ro are the inner and outer radii in m,\n");
printf ("fmin is the lowest frequency to compute in Hz,\n");
printf ("fmax is the highest frequency to compute in Hz,\n");
printf ("Nf is the number of frequency points to use. \n");
exit (1);

}

sscanf (argv[il, "4d" ,&number_of_rings) ;

sscanf (argv[2],"%1f",&inner_radius);

sscanf (argv (3],"%1f",kouter_radius);

sscanf (argv[4],"%1f",&fmin);

sscanf (argv(5],"4%1f" ,&fmax);

sscanf (argv([6] ,"%d" , énumber_of_frequencies) ;
pi=4.*atan(1.);
fmult=pow(fmax/fmin, 1./(float) (number_of_frequencies-1));

/* remove the output files */
sprintf (syscommand, "rm ~-f %s 4s", current_file,voltage_file);

system (syscommand);

/* allocate space for the ring information +/
ring_radii=v_get (2*number_of_rings) ;

ring_R=v_get (2«number_of_rings) ;

ring_L=m_get (2*number_of_rings ,2*number_of_rings) ;
Zp*zm_get (2*number_of_rings ,2*number_of_rings) ;

incidence=zm_get (2,2*number_of_rings) ;

/* compute ring geometries */

t=(inner_radius-inner_radius/100) /number_of_rings;
/* inner conductor */

a=inner_radius/100;

i=0;

while (i < number_of_rings)

[PAGE 500]
AR6 Coaxial PEEC Calculator Appendix B

ring_radii->ve[i]=a;
at=t;

it+:

?

/* outer conductor */

a=outer_radius;

i=0;

while (i < number_of_rings)

{
ring_radii~>ve[i+number_of_rings] =a;
at=t;
it+;

}

outer _thickness=a-outer_radius;

/* set the reference distance - any value with c>outer_radius+outer_thickness
is fine as long as it does not cause numerical instability */

c=atouter_thickness;

/* print out a summary +/

printf ("# inner radius = %#12.4e\n",inner_radius) ;

printf ("# outer radius 412.4e\n",outer_radius) ;

printf ("# outer conductor thickness = 412.4e\n" ,outer_thickness) ;

printf ("# reference radius = %12.4e\n",c):

printf ("# number of rings per conductor = 4d\n" ,number_of_rings) ;

printf ("# DC inductance = Ye H/n\n" , coax (inner_radius ,outer_radius, outer_thickness));

printf ("# High frequency inductance = Ye H/m\n" , 2.e-7+#log (outer_radius/inner_radius)) ;

printf ("\n# frequency resistance inductance \n");

/* compute the ring resistances */
i=0;

while (i < 2*number_of_rings)

{

ring_R->ve[i] =ring_resistance(ring_radii->ve [i] ,t);

[PAGE 501]
Appendix B Coaxial PEEC Calculator A87

it+
/* compute the partial inductance matrix */

1i=0;

while (i < 2*number_of_rings~1)

{

jeiri;

while (j < 2*number_of_rings)

{
k=ring_partials (ring_radii->ve[i] ,ring_radii->ve[j],c,t,

&ring_L->me[i] [i] , &ring_L->me([j] [j] ,@ring_L->me[i] [j] ,#R1,&R2) ;

if (k != 0) exit (1);
ring_L--->me[jl} [il=ring_L->me[a] [3];
j++;

}

itt;

/* build the incidence matrix */

i=0;

while (i < number_of_rings)

{
incidence~>me [0] [i] =zmake(1,06);
incidence->me [0] [itnumber_of_rings] =zmake (0,0) ;
incidence->me [1] [i] =zmake(~1,0);
incidence->me[1) (itnumber_of_rings] =zmake(-1,0);

itt;

/* compute impedance at each frequency */
k=0; frequency=fmin;
while (k < number_of_frequencies)

{

/* build the partial impedance matrix +*/

i=0;

[PAGE 502]
488 Coaxial PEEC Calculator Appendix B

while (i < 2*number_of_rings)

{
Zp->me [i] [i] =zmake(ring_R->ve[i] ,2*pi*frequency*ring_L->me [i] [i]);

j=9;
while (j < 2*number_of_rings)

{
if (i != j) Zp->me[il] [j]=zmake(0. ,2*pi*frequency*ring_L->me[i} [j]);

jet;

itt;
/* compute the equivalent impedance */
Zeqrequivalent_Z (kincidence,&Zp) ;

/* print out the results */

printf ("412.4e %12.4e 412.4e\n", frequency ,Zeq.re,Zeq.im/(2*pi*frequency));

frequency*=fmult ;

k++;
}
}
EBOB CUE RAEI A A TOE IIA IIA II TIAA AOI I IOI IAA ett fete |
/* -1 T-i1 */
/* Compute (AZ A ) «/
/* */

REECE IRIE IOI IEE ATI A AAT AAS A TTI IT AE ETI I TOI I AAI TI I AAA AA Mea A |
complex equivalent_Z (ZMAT **A, ZMAT *+*7Z)
{

ZMAT ¥*2Z1,*At, #01, *t2,4*t3;

complex Zeq;

int i,j;

/* find the inverse of Z */
Zi=zm_copy(*Z, ZMNULL) ;

zm_inverse(*Z, Zi);

[PAGE 503]
489

Appendix B_ Coaxial PEEC Calculator
ef RE Tes

}

/* form the transpose of A */
At=zm_get ((*A)->n, (#A)->m) ;
i=0;

while (i < At->m)

{
j=0;
while (j < At->n)
{
At->me [i] (j]=(*A)->me[j] [1] ;
jtts
}
itt;
}

ti=zm_get (Zi->m,At->n) ;

zm_mit(Zi,At,t1);

t2=zm_get ((*A)->m,t1->n);

zm_mlt (*A,t1,t2);

t3=zm_get (t2->m,t2->n) ;

zm_inverse(t2,t3);

Zeq=t3->me[0] [0];

zm_free(Zi); zm_free(At); zm_free(t1); am_free(t2); zm_free(t3);

return Zeq;

(DOR OOOO IGIG I iO OI OIC GOR dog age iO GIO IO sk 4K ak ace ik aie ake ok ok fee ode ke a a ok oe se eka ke ook /

/* Computes a set of partial inductances for annular coax based on */

/* a return path formed by a ring of radius c>b+t.

/*
/*
/*
/*

consistent for all calls to this subroutine.

Also computes the ring resistances.

- inner radius

b - outer radius

Note that ¢ should be */
*/
*/
*/
*/

[PAGE 504]
490 Coaxial PEEC Calculator Appendix B

/* ¢ - return radius */
f*« L1 - partial self-inductance for the inner ring */
/* L2 - partial self-inductance for the outer ring */
/* M - partial mutual inductance between the two rings */
/* rho - resistivity of the conductor in n/S «/
/* Rl - DC resistance for the inner ring */
/* R2 - DC resistance for the outer ring */

JRO OIC II IOIOGIOIOOOIGISI IO IIo a a I GIGI ICIOI IIIS IOC IGE ici /
int ring_partials (double a, double b, double c, double t, double #11,
double *L2, double *M, double *Ri, double *R2}

{

double L;

if (c < b+t) return 1;

*Li=annular_coax(a,c,t);

*L2=annular_coax(b,c,t);

L=annular_coax(a,b,t):

*M=(#L1+*L2-L) /2;

*Ri=ring_resistance(a,t);

*R2=ring_resistance(b,t);

return 0;
}
FRB OB OBEROI EIEIO UIC OCIA TEI TBI DIOS AT A AIA A TORO TOA A AKA
/* Compute the inductance per-unit-length for annular coax with x/
/* DC current distribution. */
/* a-~ inner radius */
/* b- outer radius */
/* t ~ shell thickness *f
/* returns inductance in H/m *«f

ROE ROCIO ROAR TA TTT TATE IIIT TIT AIA TI TI IIR AT I AAS OR AOD OA AAS SAA A AA |
double annular_coax (double a, double b, double t)
double mu,pi,L;

[PAGE 505]
Appendix B_ Coaxial PEEC Calculator 491

pi=4.*atan(1.);

mu=4.e-7*pi; /* permeability of free space (and nonmagnetic metals) */

L=mu/(2.*pi) *(log(b/ (att) ) +3. /8.-a/(4.*t)-t/(8.*(2. *att))+
log((at+t)/a)/(Cpow(t/a, 2) *pow(2.4+t/a,2))+
pow(b+t ,4) /(pow(t,2)*pow(2. *btt ,2))*
log((b+t)/b)-5 ./8.-b/ (4. #t) -t/(8,*(2.*btt))) ;

return L;

}

DESEO ISOS ROSES IO OD EI BIOSIS DIO ES I I IGE IGI GE A SmI a GIG Ia oR tak a /
/* Compute the inductance per-unit-length for a coax with */
/* DC current distribution. */
/* a - inner radius */
/* b - outer radius */
/* +t - shell thickness */
/* returns inductance in H/m xf

JD SIOIOIO OO a IGS IO a aIOIOIOI i tole ioioiai i aia iol iain ai tok lok iak lai aac ie a ick ie icakeak ake feat ke a ake ake /
double coax (double a, double b, double t)
{

double mu,pi,L;

pi=4.*atan(1.);

mu=4.e-7*pi; /* permeability of free space (and nonmagnetic metals) */

L=mu/ (2. *pi) *(log(b/a)+1./4.+pow(bt+t ,4)/(pow(t ,2)*pow(2.*b+t ,2))+
log((b+t)/b)-5./8.-b/(4. #t) -t/(8.*(2.*b+t)));

return L;

}

PEO ORCI IA TOGO ACEI OSG OIGI IOS EE FOO EIEIACO IOI GCI /
double ring_resistance (double radius, double thickness)
{

double R,pi;

pi=4.*atan(1.);

R=rho/(pi*pow(radius+thickness, 2) -pi*pow(radius,2));

return R;

[PAGE 507]
Appendix C

SAMPLE SPICE SSN
SIMULATIONS

« SSN demonstration circuit

* Run on unmodified SPICE3f£4

* i1 - on-chip vdd

* 15 ~ on-chip vss

* ol - off-chip vdd
* o5 - off-chip ground

* 12 - active driver
* 13 - quiet driver - holding high
* 14 - quiet driver - holding low

xint il 01 i2 02 i3 03 i4 04 i5 o5 interconnect
xdrv1 ini i2 i1 iS driver

xdrv2 i1 13 it i8 driver

xdrv3 i5 14 i1 i5 driver

xdrv4 in inl ii i5 inv

vvdd t1 0 3.3

Lsupply t1 01 5n
vend o5 0 0

493

[PAGE 508]
494 Sample SPICE SSN Simulations Appendix C

cin 02 05 25p
c2n 03 05 25p
c3n o4 05 25p

clip o2 01 25p
c2p 03 01 25p
c3p 04 ol 25p

* off-chip bypass capacitance

cbypassi o1 o5 10u

* on-chip bypass capacitance

*cbypass2 i1 if 10n

vin in i5 pulse 0 3.3 in .5n .5n 9n 20n

-control

tran in 50n

set width=100

set nobreak

print v(i1)-v(i5)+2,v(02)+8,v(03)+2,v(04)+.6 > results.dat
quit

-endc

.end

-Subckt driver in out ovdd ognd

* optimized to driver a 50pF load in 2ns over

* a 3.3 volt swing

* last stage
mpl out ini ovdd ovdd pmos_book l=1u w=1500u
mnl out ini ognd ognd nmos_book 1l=1u w=600u

* 2nd to last stage

mp2 ini in2 ovdd ovdd pmos_book l=1u w=750u

[PAGE 509]
Appendix C Sample SPICE SSN Simulations 495

mn2 ini in2 ognd ognd nmes_book l=1u w=300u
* 3rd to last stage

mp3 in2 in3 ovdd ovdd pmos_book ]=1u w=375u
mn3 in2 in3 ognd ognd nmos_book 1=1u w=150u
* 4th to last stage

mp4 in3 in4 ovdd ovdd pmos_book 1=1u w=188u
mn4 in3 in4 ognd ognd nmos_bock 1=1u w=75u
* Sth to last stage

mp5 in4 inS owdd ovdd pmos_book 1=1u w=94u
mn5 in4 ind ognd ognd nmos_book 1l=1u w=37u
* 6th to last stage

mp6 inS in ovdd ovdd pmos_book l=1iu w=47u
mn6 in5 in ognd ognd nmos_book 1l=1u w=19u
-ends driver

-subckt inv in out vdd gnd

mp1 out in vdd vdd pmos_book 1l=1u w=23u
mol out in gnd gnd nmos_book 1=1u w=9u

-ends inv

* 5-wire linear interconnect

*

oO 0 oO a 9

*

| <-> | <-> |<->|<->|

* 0.30.30.30.3 mm

* wires are 3 mm long

*

spaced at 0.3 mm

*

radius of 0.05 mm

[PAGE 510]
496 Sample SPICE SSN Simulations

* Use the round wire formula for the partial self inductances.
* Use the current filament approximation, centered on the wires,

* for the partial mutual inductances.

-subckt interconnect il 01 i2 02 i3 03 i4 04 i5 ob
Li it of 2.272n
K12 Li L2 0.5268
K13 L1 L3 0.3440
Ki4 L1 L4 0.2369
K1&8 Li L5 0.1609
L2 i2 02 2.272n
K23 L2 L3 0.5268
K24 L2 L4 0.3440
K25 L2 L5 0.2369
L3 i3 03 2.272n
K34 L3 L4 0.5268
K35 L3 L5 0.3440
L4 14 04 2.272n
K45 L4 L5 0.5268
L5 i5 oS 2.272n

.ends interconnect

* NMOS example model for book simulations
* From Table 4.4 Bakoglu
* with LD=0

*

-model nmos_book nmos

+ LEVEL=1

+ VTO=0.85

+ KP=53U

+ GAMMA=0.175

+ PHI=0.56

+ LAMBDA=0.03

PB=0.89

CGS0=2 .4e-10

CGDO=2 .4e-10

+

+

+

Appendix C

[PAGE 511]
Appendix C Sample SPICE SSN Simulations 497

+ CGBO=2.e-10
+ CJ=13e-5

+ CISW=6.5e-10
+ NSUB=7e14

+ TOX=400e-10
*+ XJ=0.35e-6
+ LD=0,

+ UO=650

* PMOS example model for book simulations
* From Table 4.4 Bakoglu
* with LD=0

*

-model pmos_boock pmos
+ LEVEL=1

+ VTO=-0.85

+ KP=21U

+ GAMMA=0.715

+ PHI=0,7

+ LAMBDA=0 .066

+ PB=1.0

+ CGSO=3.4e-10

+ CGDO=3. 4e-10

+ CGBO=2.e-10

+ CJ=23e-5

+ CISW=156-10

+ NSUB=1.1e16

+ TOX=400e-10

¥+ XJ=0.5e-6

+ LD=0.

+ Y0=240

[PAGE 513]
Appendix D

SAMPLE MODAL
DECOMPOSITION CODE

#include <stdio.h>

#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <matrix2.h>

#include <math.h>

/*
Requires the Meschach library of mathematical subroutines
available from the netlib2.cs.utk.edu archive.

*/

void eigen (MAT*, MAT*, MAT*#, VEC*#, VEC#);

void get_mn (FILE*, int*, int+*);

int eigen_real (MAT* ,MAT* ,VEC* );

void subckt_line (FILE *,char *,int ,int,char *,char *);

void call_line (FILE *,char *,int ,int ,int ,int ,int 3

double Length=.2; /* length of multiconductor transmission line in m */
double tr_min=te-9; /* minimum edge rate the lumped model will support */
int wrap=5; /* number of node pairs per line in subcircuit a /
#define MAXNORM le-14 /* maximum allowed error in matrix checks */
main ()

499

[PAGE 514]
500 Sample Modal Decomposition Code Appendix D
ON

FILE *fp;

MAT *C,*L,*LC,#CL,*Tv,#Ti,*iTv,*iTi, *T1,*T2,*#Lm,*Cm;
VEC *lv,*1li;

char node[i0] ;

double ZO,TD, vp, vpmax,sub_Length, Cgnd;

int i,j,k,m,n,p,q,n_sub;

/* get the inductance matrix */

fp = fopen("L.matrix","r");

get_mn (fp,é&m,&n) ;

L=m_get(m,n);

mn_finput (fp,L);

fclose (fp);

if (m != n) { puts ("m not equal to n in L.\n"); exit (1); }

i=n;

/* get the capacitance matrix */

fp = fopen("C.matrix","r");

get_mn (fp,&m,é&n) ;

C=n_get (m,n);

m_finput Cfp,C);

fclose (fp);

if (m != n) { puts ("m not equal to n in C.\n"); exit(1); }

if (m != i} { puts ("L and C are not the same size.\n"); exit(1): }

LC=m_get (m,n); CL=m_get(m,n); Tv=m_get (m,n); Ti=m_get({m,n);

lv=v_get(m); li=v_get(m);
mmlt (L,C,LC}; mimlt (C,L,CL);

if (eigen_real(LC,Tv,lv) != 0) exit (1);
if(eigen_real(CL,Ti,li) != 0) exit (1);

/* compute the inverse transformation */

iTv=m_get(m,n); iTi=m_get(m,n);

[PAGE 515]
Appendix D Sample Modal Decomposition Code 501

m_inverse (Tv,iTv}); m_inverse (Ti,iTi);

/* find the modal inductances and capacitances */
Lm=m_get(m,n); Cm=m_get(m,n);
Ti=m_get(m,n); T2=m_get(m,n);

m_mlt(iTv,L,T2); m_mlt(T2,Ti,Lm);

i=0;
do

{
Lm->me[i] [i]=fabs(Lm->me[iJ][i]); /* eliminate negative inductances */
itt;

} while (i<m);

/* recompute Tv to eliminate sign ambiguity */

m_inverse (Lm,T2); m_m1t(L,Ti,T1); m_m1t(T1,T2,Tv);

m_inverse (Tv,iTvw);

/* recompute Cm with new Tv */

m_mlt(iTi,C,T2); m_mlt(T2,Tv,Cm);
DEERE OOO IGS IISA OICOOIO SISO IO GI criti /

/* write the spice netlist for modal decomposition */

(IORI Ok desk tea ak ORION kok OR ik foio tok a i koi geiko sok tk /

fp = fopen("mctl.ckt","w");

subckt_line (fp,"metl",m,1,"i","o");

/* put in the voltage sources on the inputs and outputs */

i=0;

do

{
j=0; p=0; q=0;
do
{

[PAGE 516]
502

Sample Modal Decomposition Code

fprintf (fp, "ELAd_td TLid_iéid TLid_ud 4d 0 Ze\n",
i,j,i,p,i,pti, j+1,Tv->me [i] [j]);
ptt; qtt+; jtt;
} while (j<m);
fprintf (fp,"VL%d_1 TL%d_O i%d O\n",i1,1,i+1);
fprintf (fp,"VL%d_2 TL%d_4%d 0 O\n",i,i,m);

itt;

} while Ci<m);

fputs ("\n",fp);

i=0;

do

{

j=0; p=0; q=0;
do

fprintf (fp,"ER%d_%d TR%d_%d TR%d_%id Yd 0 Ye\n",
i,j,i,p,i,p+1,j+1+m,Tv->me[i] (j]);
ptt; qtt; j++;
} while (j<m);
fprintf (fp,"VRAd_1 TR4d_O ofd O\n",i,1,i+1);
fprintf (fp,"VR%d_2 TR4d_%d O O\n",i,i,m);

it+;

} while (i<m);

fputs ("\n",fp);

/* put in the decoupled tranmsission lines */

i=0;

do
{

20=sqrt (Lm-->me [i] [i] /Cm--->me [i] [i]);
TD=Length*sqrt (Lm->me[i] [i]*Cm~>me [il] [i});
fprintf (fp,"Thd Ud 0 Yd 0 ZO=%¢e TD=4e\n",i,i+1,i+1+m,20,TD);

1t+;

} while (i<m);

Appendix D

[PAGE 517]
Appendix D Sample Modal Decomposition Code 503

fputs ("\n",fp);

/* put in the current sources */
i=0;

do

fprintf (fp,"FL4d_d 0 %d EL%d_0 %e\n",i,j,i+1,j,iTi->me [il [4];
jtt;
} while (j<m);
fputs ("\n",fp);
itt;

} while (i<m);

i=0;

do

fprintf (fp, "FR%d_%d 0 4d ER%d_0 Ke\n" ,i,j,itl+m,j,iTi->me [i] [j]);
jtt;
} while (j<m);
fputs ("\n",fp);
i++;

} while (i<m);

fputs (".ends mctl\n",fp);
fclose (fp);

ABBE EEO O BOER EDO OO a Oa EE Ka /
/* write the spice netlist for a lumped model */

RBH A COUR OO COICO IOS EO a ra EEK i /

/* find the max modal phase velocity */

[PAGE 518]
504 Sample Modal Decomposition Code Appendix D

i=0;

vpmax=0;

do

{
vp=1/sqrt (Lm->me [i] [i] *Cm->me[i] [i]);
if (vp > vpmax) vpmax=vp;
itt;

+ while (i<m);

/* use the fastest edge rate to find the length of the subsections */
sub_Length=0.1*vpmax*tr_min;

n_sub=Length/sub_Length;

if (n_sub == 0) n_sub=1;

sub_Length=Length/n_sub;

printf ("Number of subsections = %d\n",n_sub);

fp=fopen ("lumped.ckt","w");

/** plan on a T-circuit, so output the inductance matrix *.5 «/
subckt_line (fp,"Lmatrix_by_2",m,1,"i","o");
i=0;
do
{
fprintf (fp, "L%d iX%d ofd #e\n" ,i+1,i+1,i+1,L->me [iJ] [i] *sub_Length/2) ;
jritt;
while (j<m)
{
fprintf (fp,"Kid_%d Lid Lid Ke\n" ,i+1,j+1,i+1, +1,
L->me [i] [j]/sqrt (L--->me [4] [i] #L->me[j] (j]));
jtt;

}
itt;
} while (i<m);

fputs (".ends Lmatrix_by_2\n\n" fp);

/* inductance matrix */

subckt_line (fp,"Lmatrix",m,1,"i","o");

[PAGE 519]
Appendix D Sample Modal Decomposition Code 505

i=0;

do

{
fprintf (fp,"Lid id ofd fe\n",i+1,i+1,i+1,L->me[i] [i] *sub_Length) ;
jeitt;

while (j<m)

{
fprintf (fp,"K%d_4d Lid Lid Ze\n" ,it1,j+1,it1,j+i,
L->me [i] [3] /sqrt (L->me [il] [i] *L->me[jJ] [j]));
jt;
}
it+;

} while (i<m);
fputs (".ends Lmatrix\n\n",fp);

/* the capacitance matrix */
subckt_line (fp,"Cmatrix",m,2,"i","o");
i=0;
do
{

j=0;

Cgnd=0;

Cgnd=Cgnd+C->me[i] [j];
itt;
} while (j<m);
fprintf (fp,"C%d_0O i%d 0 Ze\n",i+1,i+1,Cgnd*sub_Length) ;
jriti;
while (}<m)
{
fprintf (fp,"Chd_Ud itd ifd Ye\n",i+1,j+1,i+1, j+1,
~1*C->me [i] [j]*sub_Length) ;

} while (i<m);

[PAGE 520]
506 Sample Modal Decomposition Code Appendix D

fputs (".ends Cmatrix\n\n",fp);

/* cascade to create the the transmission line */
sprintf (node,"%d_",n_sub+t1);
subckt_line (fp, "mct1",m,1,"1_",node);

call_line (fp,"Lmatrix_by_2",1,m,1,1,2);

i=1;

while (i<n_sub-1)

{
itt;
call_line (fp, "Cmatrix",i,m,2,i,i);
call_line (fp, "Lmatrix",i,m,1,i,i+1);
}
itt;

call_line (fp,"Cmatrix",i,m,2,i,i);

call_line (fp,"Lmatrix_by_2",i,m,1,i,i+1);

fputs (".ends mctl\n\n",fp);
fclose (fp);

/* output the subcircuit call line */
void subckt_line (FILE *fp,char name(],int m,int option,char n1i[],char n2[])
{

int i,j;

fprintf (fp,".subckt %4s",name);

j=0; i=0;

do

{
if (option==1) fprintf (fp," %s%d 4844" ,nt,i+1,n2,i+1);
if (option==2) fprintf (fp," %s%d",n1,i+1);
if (j++ == wrap-i && i+1<m) { fputs("\n+ ",fp); j=0; }
i++;

} while (i<m);

fputs ("\n",fp);

[PAGE 521]
Appendix D Sample Modal Decomposition Code

/* output a line of subcircuit call */
void call_line (FILE *fp, char subckt[], int instance,

int m, int option, int n1, int n2)

{
int i,j;
fprintf (fp,"X4%sid",subckt, instance) ;
i=0; j=0;
do
{
if (option==1) fprintf (fp," %d_%d 4d_%d",n1,i+1,02,i+1);
if (option==2) fprintf (fp," %d_%d",n1,i+1);
if (jt+tt==wrap-1 && i+1<m) {fputs("\nt ",fp); j=0;}
it+;
} while (i<m);
fprintf (fp," %s\n",subckt);
}

/* scan the standard matrix format for the array size */
void get_mn (FILE *fp, int *m, int *n)
{

char line[100] ,word[100] ;

fseek (fp,0,SEEK_SET) ;
while (fgets(line,100,fp) != NULL)

{
sscanf (line,"%s",word);
if (stremp(word,"Matrix:") == 0)
{
sscanf (line, "4sidisid" ,word,m,word,n);
fseek (fp,0,SEEK_SET);
return;
}
}

507

[PAGE 522]
508 Sample Modal Decomposition Code Appendix D

/* solve the eigenvalue problem and do some checks */
int eigen_real (MAT *A,MAT *A_re, VEC *ei_re)
{

MAT *A_im,*diag,*T1, *T2;

VEC *ei_im;

int i,m,n;
m=A->m; n=A->n;

A_im=m_get(m,n); ei_im=v_get(m);

eigen (A,A_re,A_im,ei_re,ei_im); /* solve eigenvalue problem */

/* check for imaginary parts +/
if (m_norm_inf(A_im) > 1.e-14) return 1;

if (v_norm_inf(ei_im) > 1.e-14) return 2;

/* put eigenvalues into a diagonal matrix */
diag=m_get(m,n);
1=0;

do { diag->me[i] [il=ei_re->ve[i]; i++; } while (i < m);

/* check for orthonormal properties */
Ti=m_get (m,n);

T2=m_get (m,n);

m_inverse(A_re,T1);

m_mlt (A_re,diag,T2);

m_mlt (T2,T1,diag) ;

m_inverse (diag ,T1);

m_mit(A,T1,T2);

i=0;

do { T2->me[i]) [i]-=1; i++; } while Ci<m);
if (m_norm_inf(T2) > MAXNORM) return 3;

return 0;

[PAGE 523]
Appendix D Sample Modal Decomposition Code 509

void eigen (MAT *A, MAT *X_re, MAT *X_im, VEC *evals_re, VEC *evals_im)

{
MAT 4T,*Q;

/* A is the matrix whose eigenvalues and eigenvectors are sought */

/* k*th eigenvector is k'th column of (X_re + i*X_im) */

mget(A->m,A->n) ;
m_copy(A,MNULL) ;

4
ll

schur(T,Q); /* compute Schur form: A = Q#T#Q°T */

schur_evals(T,evals_re,evals_im); /* extract eigenvalues */

schur_vecs(T,Q,X_re,X_im); /* Q not needed for eiegenvalues */

* spice subcircuit for modal decomposition
-subckt metl i1 o1 12 02 13 03 i4 04 i5 o5
ELO_O TLO_O TLO_1 1 0 3.651740e-01
ELO_1 TLO_1 TLO_2 2 6 5.499348e-01
ELO_2 TLO_2 TLO_3 3 0 5.570483e-01
4 0 4.259384e-01
5 0 -2.300951e-01

ELO_3 TLO_3 TLO_4
ELO_4 TLO_4 TLO_5
VLO_1 TLO_O i1 0

VLO_2 TLO_5 0 0

EL1_0 TL1_0 TL1_1
EL1_1 TL1_1 TL1_2
EL1_2 TLi_2 TLi_3

0 4.795472e-01

0 -1,.064700e-01

0 4.361856e-01
EL1_3 TLi_3 TL1i_4 4 0 ~-5.627495e-01
EL1_4 TL1_4 TLi_5 5 0
VLi_1 TL1_O i2 0
VL1_2 TL1_5 0 0
EL2_0 TL2_0 TL2_1
EL2_1 TL2_1 TL2_2
EL2_2 TL2_2 TL2_3
EL2_3 TL2_3 TL2_4

Af bf! Ww NM

5,158394e-01

5,198346e-01
~6.073649e-01
2.583636e-03
-8.657632e-03
~6.117483e-01

a FP w© NH eS
2 S20 oO oOo

EL2_4 TL2_4 TL2_5
VL2_1 TL2_0 i3 0

[PAGE 524]
510

VL2_2 TL2_5 0 0

EL3_0
EL3_i
EL3_2
EL3_3
EL3_4
VL3_1
VL3_2
EL4_0
EL4_1
EL4_2
EL4_3
EL4_4
VL4_1
VL4_2

ERO_O
ERO_1
ERO_2
ERO_3
ERO_4
VRO_1
VRO_2
FR1i_0O
ER1_1
ER1_2
ER1_3
ER1_4
VR1i_1
VRi_2
ER2_0
ER2_1
ER2_2
ER2_3
ER2_4
VR2_1

VR2_2

TL3_0
TL3_1
TL3_2
TL3_3
TL3_4
TL3_0
TL3_5
TL4_0
TL4_1
TL4_2
TL4_3
TL4_4
TL4_0
TL4_5

TRO_O
TRO_1
TRO_2
TRO_3
TRO_4
TRO_O
TRO_5
TR1_0
TR1i_1
TR1_2
TRi_3
TR1_4
TR1_0
TRA_5
TR2_0
TR2_1
TR2_2
TR2_3
TR2_4
TR2_0
TR2_5

TL3_1
TL3_2
TL3_3
TL3_4
TL3_5
i4 0
00
TL4_1
TL4_2
TL4_3
TL4_4
TL4_5
i5 oO
00

TRO_1
TRO_2
TRO_3
TRO_4
TRO_5
o1 0
00
TRi_1
TR1_2
TR1_3
TR1i_4
TRi_S
02 0
00
TR2_1
TR2_2
TR2_3
TR2_4
TR2_5
03 0
00

a Ff WwW he
> a © © en © ©)

6
T
8
9

o oc Oo Oo 86

o o 03 6

Sample Modal Decomposition Code

4.811427e-01
-1.160280e-01
-4.328936e-01
&.692112e-01
5.072893e-01

3.673636e-01
§.512542e-01
~5.586016e-01
-4,216790e-01
-2.222332e-01

3.651740e-01
5.499348e-01
5.570483e-01
4,259384e-01

10 0 -2.300951e-01

6 0 4.795472e-01

7 O -1.064700e-01
8 0 4.361856e-01
9 0 -5,627495e-01
10 0 5.158394e-01

6 O 5.198346e-01
7 O -6.073649e-01
8 0 2.5836366e-03
9 0 -8.657632e-03
10 0 -6.117483e-01

Appendix D

[PAGE 525]
Appendix D Sample Modal Decomposition Code

ER3_0 TR3_0 TR3_1 6 0 4.811427e-01
ER3_i1 TR3_1 TR3.2 7 0 -1,.160280e-01
ER3_2 TR3_2 TR3_3 8 0 ~4.328936e-01
ER3_3 TRS_3 TR3_4 9 0 5.692112e-01
ER3_4 TR3_4 TR3_5 10 0 &.072893e-01
VR3_1 TR3_0 04 0

VR3_2 TR3_5 O 0

ER4_0 TR4_0 TR4_1 6 0 3.673636e-01
ER4_1 TR4_1 TR4_2 7 0 5.512542e-01
ER4_2 TR4_2 TR4_3 & © -5.586016e-01
ER4_3 TR4_3 TR4_4 9 0 -4.216790e-01
ER4_4 TR4_4 TR4_5 10 0 -2.222332e-01
VR4_1 TR4_0 05 0

VR4_2 TR4_5 0 0

TO 10 6 O 20=91.448571 TD=1.211573e-09
T1 20 7 9 Z0=62.786004 TD=1.067471e-09
T2 3 0 8 O Z0=75.211097 TD=1.126285e-09
T3 4 0 9 O Z0=54.415470 TD=1.031954e-09
T4 5 0 10 O Z0=49.699831 TD=1.013872e-09

FLO_O 0 1 ELO_O 3.652535e-01
FLO_i 0 1 EL1_0 4.796516e-01
FLO.2 0 1 EL2_0 5.199477e-01
FLO_3 0 1 EL3_0 4.812474e-01
FLO_4 0 1 EL4_0 3.674436e-01

FL1_0 0 2 ELO_O 5.500891¢-01
FL1_1 © 2 EL1_0 -1.064941e-01
FL1_2 0 2 EL2_0 -6.075022e-01
FLi_3 0 2 EL3_0 -1.160542e-01
FLi_4 0 2 EL4_0 6.513788e-01

FL2_0 0 3 ELO_O 5.571499e-01
FL2_1 0 3 ELi_O 4.362651e-01
FL2_2 0 3 EL2_0 2.584107e-03
FL2_3 0 3 EL3_0 -4.329725e-01

511

[PAGE 526]
512

FL2_4 0 3 EL4_0

FL3_0
FL3_1
FL3_2
FL3_3
FL3_4

FL4_0
FL4_1
FL4_2
FL4_3
FL4_4

FRO_O
FRO_1
FRO_2
FRO_3
FRO_4

FR1_0
FR1_1
FR1_2
FR1_3
FR1_4

FR2_0
FR2_1
FR2_2
FR2_3
FR2_4

FR3_0
FR3_1
FR3_2

o oOo 0 Oo @&
> -F PF FF

o oc fo 8S © oo 8 CC © o oO 8S CG 98
An A D OD ar nan Am om

NON NO ONON

oO ¢C¢ &© 8& 6
oom OD Oo Ow

0
0
0

FR3_3 0

FR3_4

0

9
9
9
9
9

ELO_O
EL1_0
EL2_0
EL3_0
EL4_0

ELO_O
EL1_0
EL2_0
EL3_0
EL4_9

ERO_O
ER1_0
ER2_0
ER3_@
ER4_0

ERO_0O
ER1_0
ER2_0
ER3_0
ER4_0

ERO_O
ER1_9
ER2_0
ER3_0
ER4_0

ERO_O
ER1_0
ER2_0
ER3_0
ER4_0

-5.587034e-01

4.260161e-01
-5.628523e-01
-8.659213e-03
5.693151¢e-01
-4.217560e-01

-2.301111¢e-01
5.158755e-01
-6.117910e-01
5.073247e-01
-2.222487e-01

3.6525356-01
4.796516e-01
5.199477e-01
4.812474e-01
3.674436e-01

§.500591¢e-01
-1.064941e-01
-6.075022e-01
-1.160542e-01
5.513788e-01

5.571499¢e-01
4,.362651e-01
2.584107e-03
-4.3297256-01
-5.587034e-01

4.260161¢e-01
-§.628523e-01
-8.659213e-03
§.693151e-61
--4.217560e-01

Sample Modal Decomposition Code

Appendix D

[PAGE 527]
Appendix D

Sample Modal Decomposition Code

FR4_0 0 10 ERO_O -2.301111e-01
FR4_1 0 10 ER1_0 5.158755e-01
FR4_2 0 10 ER2_0 -6.117910e-01

FR4_3 0 10 ER3_0 5.073247e-O1

FR4_4 0 10 ER4_0 -2.222487e-01

-ends mctl

* inductance and capacitance matrices for lumped approximation

-Subckt Lmatrix_by_2 it 01 i2 02 i3 03 14 04 i8 05

Li ii o1 3.
Ki_2 Li L2
K1_3 Li L3
K1i_4 Li L4
Ki_5 Li LS
L2 i2 02 3,
K2_3 L2 L3
K2_4 L2 L4
K2_5 L2 L5
L3 i3 03 3.
K3_4 L3 L4
K3_5 L3 LS
L4 i4 04 3.
K4_5 L4 LS
L5 i5 05 3.

710000e-09
2.250156e-01
7 .654063e-02
3.380271¢e-02
1.771760e-02
678000e-09
2.233583e-01
7.605328e-02
3.37757 3e-02
677000e-09
2.233519e-01
7 .649294e-02
680000e-09
2.249209e-01
712000e-09

.ends Lmatrix_by_2

-Subckt Lmatrix i1 01 i2 o2 i3 03 i4@ 04 id 05

Li i1 01 7.

420000e-09

K1_2 L1 L2 2.250156e8-01
Ki_3 Li L3 7.654063e-02
K1_4 L1 L4 3.3802716-02

K1_5 Li L5

1.771760e-02

L2 i2 02 7.356000e-09
K2_3 L2 L3 2.233583e-01
K2_4 L2 L4 7.605328e-02

513

[PAGE 528]
514 Sample Modal Decomposition Code Appendix D

K2_5 L2 L5 3.377573e-02
L3 i3 03 7.354000e-09
K3_4 L3 L4 2.233519e-01
K3_5 L3 LS 7.649294e-02
L4 i4 04 7.360000e-09
K4_5 L4 L5 2.249209e-01
L5 i65 0&5 7.424000e-09

.ends Lmatrix

-subckt Cmatrix i1 i2 i3 14 i5
C1_0 i1 0 1.441976e-12
C1_2 i1 i2 2.066000e-13
C1_3 i1 i3 1.465600e-14
C1_4 i1 i4 5.744000e-15
C1_5 i1 i65 3.224000e-15
C2_0 i2 0 1.274436e-12
C2_3 i2 13 2.042000e-13
C2_4 i2 14 1.383000e-14
C2_5 i2 if 5.734000e-15
C3_0 i3 0 1.267930e-12
C3_4 13 14 2.040000e-13
€3_5 i3 i5 1.461400e-14
C4_0 i4 0 1.274226e-12
C4_5 14 i5 2,068000e-13
C5_0 i5 O 1.443028e-12

.ends Cmatrix

-Subckt met] 1_t 11_1 1_2 11_2 1_3 11_3 1.4 141_4 1_5 11.5
XLmatrix_by_21 1_1 2_1 1.2 2.21.32314241.5 2_5 Lmatrix_by_2
XCmatrix2 2_1 2_2 2_3 2.4 2_5 Cmatrix

XLmatrix2 2_1 3_1 2_2 3_2 2_3 3_3 2.4 3.4 2.5 3_5 Lmatrix
XCmatrix3 3_1 3_2 3_3 3_4 3_5 Cmatrix

XLmatrix3 3_1 4_1 3_2 4_2 3_3 4_3 3_4 4_4 3_5 4_5 Lmatrix
XCmatrix4 4_1 4_2 4.38 4.4 4_5 Cmatrix

XLmatrix4 4_1 5_1 4_2 5_2 4.3 5.3 4_4 5_4 4_5 § 5 Lmatrix

XCmatrix5 5_i 5_2 5_3 5_4 5_5 Cmatrix

XLmatrixS 5_1 6.1 5_2 6_2 5_3 6.3 5_4 6_4 5_5 65 Lmatrix

[PAGE 529]
Appendix D

XCmatrix6 6_1 6_2 6_3

XLmatrix6 6_1 7_1 6_2
XCmatrix? 7_1 7_2 7_3
XLmatrix7 7_1 8_1 7_2

XCmatrix8 8_1 8_2 8_3

XLmatrix8 8_1 9_1 8_2

XCmatrix9 9_1 9_2 9.3
XLmatrix9 9_1 10_1 9_2 10_2 9.3 10_3 9_4 10_4 9_5 10_5 Lmatrix

Sample Modal Decomposition Code

6_4 6_5 Cmatrix
7_2 6_3 7_3 6_4 7_4 6_5 7_5 Lmatrix
7_4 7_& Cmatrix
8_2 7_3 8_3 7_4 8_4 7_5 8_5 Lmatrix
8_4 8_5 Cmatrix
9_2 8.3 9.3 8_4 9_4 8_5 9_5 Lmatrix
9.4 9_5 Cmatrix

XCmatrix1O 10_1 10_2 10_3 10_4 10_5 Cmatrix

XLmatrix_by_210 10_1 11_1 10_2 11_2 10_3 11_3 10_4 11.4 10_5 11_5 Lmatrix_by_2

.ends mctl

* Modal decomposition demonstration circuit

* choose the interconnect model

-include Lumped.ckt

*. include mctl.ckt

Xint i1 01 i2 02 i3 03

vi
ri
v2
r2
r3
v4
r4
v5
rs

ni
ni
n2
n2
i3
n4
n4
nS
nd

0 pulse O 3.3 in
ii 50

0 pulse 0 3.3 in
i2 50

@ 50

0 pulse 0 3.3 in
i4 50

0 pulse O 3.3 in
if 50

* capacitive loads
o1 0 6p
02 0 6p
03 0 6p
o4 0 6p
o5 0 6p

cl
c2
c3
c4
cS

.control

14 04 i5 o5 mctl
2n 2n 8n 20n

2n 2n 8n 20n

2n 2n 8n 20n

2n 2n 8n 20n

515

[PAGE 530]
516

tran in 6in

set width=150

set nobreak

print 11,12,13,14,i5 > results_i.dat
print o1,02,03,04,05 > results_o.dat
quit

.endc

-end

Sample Modai Decomposition Code

Appendix D

[PAGE 531]
Appendix E

SAMPLE LAYER PEELING
CODE

#include <stdlib.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <stdio.h>

#include <math.h>

/* Sample layer peeling program for removing multiple reflections

from TDR traces. */

int MAXPOINTS=1024; /* Maximum number of data points */
int MAXLINE=100; /* Maximum number of characters per line
in the data files +/

double sysZo=50; /* characteristic impedance of the TDR */

int main(int argc, char *argv[})
{
FILE *fp;
char *input,*match,*output,line[100];
int i,j,maxdata, istart;
double time [MAXPOINTS] , vpL [MAXPOINTS] , vn [MAXPOINTS] ,
vpR(MAXPOINTS] ,vnR{MAXPOINTS] ,
Zo (MAXPOINTS] , Zraw[MAXPOINTS} , vr [(MAXPOINTS] , vm [MAXPOINTS] ;

517

[PAGE 532]
518 Sample Layer Peeling Code Appendix E

if (arge != 4)

{
printf ("usage: peel inputfile matchedfile outputfile\n\n") ;

exit (0);

input=argv [1];
match=argv [2];

output=argv [3] ;

/* load the input data */
fp=fopen(input,"r");
i=0;
while (fgets(line,MAXLINE,fp) != NULL)
{
/* assumes that the line contains: integer time step number,
double time, double voltage */
/* no blank lines are allowed */
if (i < MAXPOINTS) sscanf (line, "%d%1f%1f",&j,&time[i] ,&vr[i]);
itt;
}
fclose (fp);
if (i >= MAXPOINTS) printf ("Warning: too Many data points.");

maxdata=i;

/* load the matched data */
fp=fopen(match,"r");
i=0;

while (fgets(line,MAXLINE,fp) != NULL)

{
/* assumes that the line contains: integer time step number,
double time, double voltage */
if €i < MAXPOINTS) sscanf (line, "Ad4l£41£" ,&j,&time(i},&vm[i]);
i++;
}

fclose (fp);

if (i >= MAXPOINTS) printf ("Warning: too many data points.");

[PAGE 533]
Appendix E Sampte Layer Peeling Code 519

/* find the incident and reflected waves */
i=0;
while (i < maxdata)
{
vpL [i] =vm [i];
yvnL [il=vr[i)]-vm[il ;

itt;

/* assume that the first set of data is already on the right side */
i=0;

while (i < maxdata) {vpR[i]=vpL[i]; vnR[i]=vnL[i]; i++;}

/* find the first non-zero data */
i=0;
while (vpR[i] == 0) i++;

istart=i;

/* peeling loop for the remaining sections */
isistart; Zo[istart] =sysZo;
while (i < maxdata-1)
{
/* Step 1: propagate across the section (skip if first set of data) */
if (i != istart)
{
j=0;

while (j < maxdata-1)

{
vpR[j+1J=vpL[j] ;
if (j > 0) vnR[j-1]=vnL[j];
jtt+;

}

/* Step 2: compute next characteristic impedance */

20[i+1] =Zo [i] *(vpR[i] +vnR[i})/(vpR[i]-vnR[i]);

[PAGE 534]
520 Sample Layer Peeling Code Appendix E
EEE

if (i == 0) Zolit+1]=sysZo;

/* Step 3: cross the boundary */

j=ii

while (j < maxdata)

{
vpL[j] =(1+Zo fi+1] /Zo [i] )/2*vpR[5]+(1-Zo [iti] /Zo [i] )/2*vnR [5];
val [j) =(1-Zo [it+1) /Z0 [i] )/2*vpR[j]+(1+Zo [it+1] /Zo [i] )/2*vnR [jl];

j++;

itt;

/* compute the basic TDR profile */
i=istart;
while (i < maxdata)
{
Zraw [i] =sysZo*vr [i] /(2*vm[i]-vr [i]);

itt;

/* save the basic TDR impedance profile and the peeled profile */
fp=fopen{output,"w");
fprintf (fp,"# Time Zo(raw) Zo(Peeled)\n");
i=istart;
while (i < maxdata/2)
{
fprintf (fp,"%e fe Ze\n",timeli] ,Zraw(2*i],Zo[i]);
itt;
}
fclose (fp);

[PAGE 535]
502, 162, 281, 305
£-network, 327
T-model, 346
T-network, 171, 318, 320, 326
Vop, 72

Via, 12

Vit, 13

Vou, 12

Voi, 13

Vss, 72

Zi, 327

Zo; 09

m™-model, 346
m-network, 170, 317, 327, 382
Pp, 230

INDEX

Pus 175
a, 264

2D modeling, 54, 348
4-probe, 277
8B/10B encoding, 29

active model, 379, 383
admittance matrix
n-network, 170
and topology, 311
conversions
S to Y, 167
short interconnects, 288
Y to S, 167
definition, 155
general topology, 337
measurement, 279, 285
paralleled, 168
short, 329
transmission line, 170

Y¥ to Z, 155

521

[PAGE 536]
Index

pee

Zto Y, 155
aggressor line, 98
Alloy 42, 191, 255
asynchronous, 77, 138

attenuation constant, 63, 69

ball-grid array, 30, 335, 410
ballast, 400
bandwidth
domain equivalence, 307
insufficient, 276, 359, 376
interconnect, 1
lumped modeling, 326, 345
modeling, 42
multilumped model, 370
power distribution, 408
rational function, 373
BGA. See ball-grid array
bounce diagram, 61, 79

boundary condition

perfect electric conductor, 363

perfect magnetic conductor, 331

363
transmission line, 70
boundary scan, 24
bus, 4, 19, 76, 109, 348

bus contention, 16

capacitance

bypass, 19, 71, 133, 139, 393, 396,

408, 412

circuit equation, 240
circuit model, 235
coefficients of capacitance, 235
coefficients of induction, 235
definition

energy, 237

field, 231

geometric, 231
frequency dependence, 238
from inductance, 355
intrinsic, 420
loading, 235
matrix

definition, 234

measurement, 309

modal, 354, 363

model, 316
measurement, 277, 295
modal decomposition, 241
mutual, 235
parallel-plate, 232
passivity, 243
reciprocity, 231, 235
reference, 244
resonance, 415

two-terminal, 235

capacitive crosstalk, 98

capacitive load, 47, 48, 83

[PAGE 537]
523

Index
Pe

CBGA, 32
characteristic impedance
definition, lossless, 59
definition, lossy, 64
loaded, 109
measurement, 297
modal, 354, 364, 403
real formula, 69
renormalization, 161
S-parameters, 156
charge, 230, 239
charge density, 175, 230
cladding, 412
clock generator, 120
clock jitter, 120
clock rate, 13, 112, 120
CMOS, 71
coax, 483
coaxial calculator, 483
coaxial transmission line, 29, 377
common-mode noise, 25, 391
common-mode rejection ratio, 393
companion matrix, 375
complex propagation constant
definition, 62
real formula, 69
compression, 132
conductance

matrix, 316

measurement, 277
conductivity, 264
conductor-loss dispersion, 251
continued fraction, 376
controlled impedance, 5, 29
convergence, 147, 204
copper weight, 412
core, 410
core noise, 417
coupling coefficient

capacitance, 100

inductance, 103

total, 104
crossbar, 6
crosstalk

bus, 348

capacitive, 98

current crowding, 251

differential signaling, 392

inductive, 101, 173

measurement, 305

skew, 125

total, 103

unequal impedance, 124

unequal velocity, 124

weak coupling, 99

wiring rules, 110
crowbar current, 16, 397

CTE, 255

[PAGE 538]
Index

Bani

current

crowbar. See crowbar current

definition, 176

modal, 202, 353, 365, 402
current crowding, 249, 255, 368

current density, 175

current mirror, 147

current-mode drivers, 21, 422

current-steering drivers, 21

cylindrical coordinates, 266

daisy chain, 6, 105
datum node, 155, 259
DCA. See direct chip attach
DDR. See dual data rate
delay. See time of flight
delay adder, 83, 87
delay-lock loop, 121
delta-I noise. See SSN
diagonalization, 201, 202
dielectric constant, 355
differential pair, 391

differential receiver, 9, 393

differential signaling, 7, 8, 21, 391

diode clamp, 399, 400
direct chip attach, 134
directional coupler, 104, 279
discontinuity

basic, 80

capacitive load, 83

impedance mismatch, 105

impedance step, 93

series capacitor, 123

series inductance, 84, 158

shunt capacitance, 91, 171

shunt inductor, 123

stub, 105

TDR, 305
dispersion, 63, 65

displacement current, 98, 264

DLL. See delay-lock loop

double clocking, 41

driver
open-collector, 19
open-drain, 19
push-pull, 15
signaling, 9
totem-pole, 15
types, 14

driver impedance, 77, 400

dual data rate, 121, 125

dual stripline, 29

duality, 93

DUT, 155, 277

ECL, 7, 10, 74, 392
eddy current, 219, 330, 332
edge connector, 334

edge rate, 305, 346

effective dielectric constant, 59

[PAGE 539]
525

Index

effective inductance, 142 first incidence switching, 78

effective series inductance, 415 flux linkage, 185, 195

effective series resistance, 415 Fourier series, even, 43
eigenvalue, 201, 351 Fourier transform

eigenvalue problem, 243, 374 domain equivalence, 276, 306
eigenvector, 201, 351, 355 time-shifting theorem, 66
electric field strength, 175 transform pair, 48

electric flux density, 230 FR-4, 411

electric potential, 230 frequency dependence, 324

electric scalar potential, 175

electrical length, 42 Gersgorin's circle theorem, 243

electromagnetic interference. See EMI glitch, 27
electrostatic discharge, 6, 400 Gram-Schmidt orthonormalization, 201,
EMI, 5, 25, 56, 392, 408, 413 356
emitter-coupled logic. See ECL ground
energy, 181, 185, 237 "perfect" , 245
AC, 71

error correction, 55

ESD. See electrostatic discharge electrostatic, 234

ESL. See effective series inductance parallel leads, 329

ESR. See effective series resistance ground bounce, 138

even mode, 307, 363, 392, 405 group velocity, 64

external inductance, 187 GTL, 10

eye diagram, 28, 114 Gunning transceiver logic. See GTL
false signaling, 55 Hermitian, 207

fan out, 8, 9 high speed, 53

far-end noise, 100, 305, 359, 366 high-impedance state, 16

feedback, SSN, 146 high-speed transceiver logic. See HSTL
FEN. See far-end noise hold time, 13, 112, 119, 125

First Cauer Form, 377 homogeneous material, 355, 367, 388

[PAGE 540]
526 Index

HSTL, 10 definition
energy, 181
IA. See impedance analyzer field, 181

IBIS, 15, 38, 146 geometric, 178

say tioning. 373 .
ill-conditioning, magnetic vector potential, 181

i e theory, 224
mee y effective, 142
impedance analyzer, 276
external, 187
impedance boundary, 70
formulas
impedance discontinuity, 41, 71
coaxial transmission line, 221,
impedance matrix
222
T-network, 171
equilateral triangle, 220
and topology, 311

; from capacitance, 355
conversions

d loop, 191
S to Z, 160, 161 TONE 1OOP,

. ound wi 1 224
short interconnects, 288 round wire over plane,

Z to S, 160, 161
definition, 153

square, 221
two-wire transmission line, 198
frequency dependence, 191

internal, 186, 190, 356

measurement, 278, 284

open, 330

power dissipation, 166 matrix

series connection, 169 circuits, 184

Y to Z, 155 lumped, 315
Z to Y, 155 measurement, 309
impedance step, 93 modal, 354, 363
incidence matrix, 164, 260, 320 positive definite, 207
inductance measurement, 238, 277, 283, 293
circuit equation, 179 minimization, 180, 198
common ground, 213 modal, 204
comparison, 216 modal decomposition, 200, 202

current crowding, 249, 255 mutual, 183

[PAGE 541]
Index

527

mutual inductance. See mutual in-

ductance

Neumann's formula. See Neumann's

formula

parallel-plate transmission line, 122

partial. See partial inductance

passivity, 200, 204

proximity effect. See current crowd-

ing
reciprocity, 184
reference. See reference
self-, 183
skin effect, 249, 252
symbol, 199
inductive crosstalk, 101
internal inductance. See inductance,
internal
internal nodes, 320, 336
intersymbol interference, 119
intrinsic capacitance. See capacitance,
intrinsic
ISI. See intersymbol interference

iterative impedance, 326

jitter, 26, 120, 121
JTAG, 24

k-factior, 200
Kelvin probe, 277

ladder network

First Cauer Form, 377
modeling, 308, 345
round wire, 264
Second Cauer Form, 387
skin effect, 369
synthesis, 376
Laplace transform, 81
layer peeling, 298, 517
logic family. 9
low-voltage differential signaling. See
LVDS
LRM, 282
lumped approximation, 42, 56. 155.
175, 238, 266, 283, 311, 312.
343, 345, 346
lumped element, 175, 312
lumped modeling, 42, 311, 346
LVDS, 7, 10. 392, 422
LVPECL, 10
LVTTL, 10

macro model, 370

magnetic field strength, 181

magnetic flux density, 175, 176, 182,
190

magnetic vector potential, 175, 181

manhattan routing, 348

margin, 119

matched impedance, 71, 72

matched load, 156, 163, 282, 287, 301.

[PAGE 542]
Index

528
331 modal voltage, 241
matrix commutation, 354 mode, 351
matrix reduction, 219, 329, See also mode conversion, 393, 403, 407
model reduction model reduction. See matrix reducnull excitation, 163 tion
parallel leads, 164 floating conductors, 246
Maxwell's equations grounded conductors, 245
Ampere's law, 189, 264, 456 modeling
circuits, 173 2D, 348
constitutive relation, 190, 231 black box, 369
continuity equation, 239 core noise, 417
Faraday's law, 176, 264, 457 frequency dependence, 324
Gauss's law, 230 general topology, 336
good conductors, 264 lumped, 311
Lenz's law, 199 model reduction, 329
Ohm's law, 264 multiconductor interconnect, 314,
meander routing, 30 316
metastability, 397 multilumped, 329
microstrip, 29, 367 open loop, 210
modal current, 241 planes, 341
modal decomposition wideband, 345
capacitance, 241 MOSFET, 145
differential signaling, 392 multidrop net, 5, 104, 109, 339
example code, 499 multilumped models, 329, 347
inductance, 202 multiple reflections, 79, 105, 297
matrix, 200 mutual inductance
resistance/inductance, 227 k-factor, 200
transmission line example, 357 circuit equation, 184

transmission lines, 349, 351 definition

[PAGE 543]
energy-based, 186 packaging, 410
field-based, 185 pad limited dic, 421
geometric, 183 parallel leads, See also matrix reduc-
Neumann's formula. See Neumann's tion, 329
formula parity, 55, 153
orthogonal wires, 220 partial equivalent electric circuit. See
sign, 186, 195 PEEC

partial inductance
near-end cluster, 105

near-end crosstalk, 365, 389
near-end noise, 100, 305, 359

comments, 53, 193
definition

magnetic vector potential, 209

NEN. See near-end noise ; .
thin-wire, 192
network synthesis, 376 .
effective inductance, 143
Neumann's formula
formulas

calculations, 186
colinear wires, 197

inductance, 178
parallel wires, 194

mutual inductance, 183
round wire, 195, 264

NFET, 15

V configuration, 220

node 0, 213, 259

, ; ground bounce, 138
noise immunity, 27, 392

. . mutual, 192
noise margin, 12, 408, 410
noise, random, 41, 129 nonuniqueness, 208
Norton equivalent model, 419 package, 132

eas . . reference. See reference
null excitation. See matrix reduction,

return at infinity, 195

329
skin effect, 252
odd mode, 307, 363, 392, 405 symbol, 199
open loop modeling, 210 passivity
orthonormalization, 201, 356 capacitance, 243
overshoot, 13, 41, 110, 400 inductance, 204

[PAGE 544]
530

resistance, 227
path dependence. See voltage. path
dependence
PBGA, 34
PCB. See printed circuit board
PEC, 363
PECL, 10
PEEC, 251, 257, 368
perfect electric conductor. See PEC
pertect magnetic conductor. See PMC
permeability, 255
PFET, 15
phase velocity
crosstalk, 103, 124
definition, 63
homogeneous material, 355
loaded, 109
modal, 355, 364
phase-lock loop, 121
PLL. See phase-lock loop
PMC, 331, 363
point-to-point signaling, 5, 71
pole, 370, 374, 377, 387
port, 260
positive definite, 207
power dissipation, 7, 9, 22, 26, 73, 204,
401, 422
power distribution, 5, 40, 408

prepreg, 411

Index

printed circuit board, 1, 30, 348, 408.
410, 423

process corner. 12, 52, 55, 110

propagation constant, 63, 70

propagation delay, 112

proximity effect. See current crowding

pseudo-differential receiver, 25

pulse propagation. 57

push-pull driver, 15

pushout, 120

PVT. See process corner

QFP. See quad flat. pack
quad flat pack, 30, 332, 410
quasi-static, 175, 183, 209, 233, 238

quiet line noise, 137

rail collapse, 132, 408
rail voltage, 140
rational function approximation, 308,
345, 369, 380, 387

receiver, 9, 24
reciprocity, 154, 184, 231, 235, 276
reference

capacitance, 244

inductance, 213

meanings, 245

open loop, 211

partial inductance, 264

vector network analyzer, 281

[PAGE 545]
531

Index
Index EE

reflection coefficient
definition, 70
generalized, 160
modal, 403
modeling, 312
VNA, 279
resistance
contact, 277, 281
current crowding, 249, 255
high-frequency formula, 254
matrix, 270, 315
measurement, 277, 283
passivity, 227
proximity effect. See current crowding
skin effect, 249, 252
transresistance, 270
resolution, TDR, 305
resonance, 415, 423
return at infinity, 195
return path, 195, 211, 275, 314, 391,
413
right-hand pole, 374, 379
ringback, 13

round wire, 189

S-parameters
and topology, 311
cascaded, 167

circuit calculations, 158

conversions
S to Y, 167
S to Z, 160, 161, 461
short interconnects, 288
Y to S, 167
Z to S, 160, 161
definition, 156
matched load, 330
measurement, 287
port reference shift, 169
power, 157
power dissipation, 166
renormalization, 162
symmetry, 166
unnormalized, 157
saturation current, 145
saturation, SSN, 146
scalar network analyzer, 280
scattering matrix. See S-parameters
scattering parameters. See S-parameters
schematic capture, 200
Second Cauer Form, 377, 387
second incidence switching, 78, 394
Series inductance, 84
settling time, 13, 105, 110, 115
setup time, 13, 112, 119, 125
shunt capacitance, 91
signal integrity, 391
signal-to-ground ratio, 110, 408, 410,

[PAGE 546]
532

Index

422
signaling standards, 9, 41, 114
simultaneous switching noise. See SSN
simultaneously switching outputs. See
SSN
single-ended signaling, 7, 391
skew, 119, 125
skin depth, 254
skin effect, 67, 249, 252, 345, 368
slew rate, 7, 9, 40, 110, 112, 120, 133,
420
Smith chart, 238, 289
SOL, 309
SOLT, 162, 282, 306
source match, 72
source synchronous, 124
spectrum, 44, 48
SSN
analytical estimation, 145
convergence, 147
definition, 110, 129
differential signaling, 392
fast bank simulation, 147
feedback, 146
inductance, 173
power distribution, 408
receivers, 25
sample SPICE simulation, 493

saturation, 146

skew, 147
wiring rules, 110
worst-case, 147
SSO. See SSN
stackup, 410
star cluster, 6, 105
step function, 82
Stokes' theorem, 176
stripline, 29
strong coupling, 99
stub, 105
superposition, 186
supply droop, 132
switching activity, 419
switching incidence, 77
symbol, 115
symmetry, 331, 360, 363, 411
synchronous, 77, 112, 124, 138
synthesis, 376

system impedance, 281

target impedance, 408
TDR. See time-domain reflectometer
TDT. See time-domain transmission
telegrapher equations, 349
tensor, 154
termination

AC, 397

definition, 394

differential pair, 404, 423

[PAGE 547]
Index

diode, 399
driver, 19
multiconductor, 402
parallel, 6, 8, 72, 394
power dissipation, 395
signaling, 7
source, 6, 72, 78, 394, 400, 431
Thevenin, 397
to voltage, 397
thin wire approximation, 180, 183
thin-wire approximation, 177
threshold voltage, 145
time constant, 84
time of flight, 59, 73, 110, 112, 346
time windowing, 276, 307
time-domain network analyzer, 306
time-domain reflectometer
even- and odd-mode, 307
layer peeling, 298
multiple reflections, 297
multiport, 305
overview, 292
parasitic extraction, 276
resolution, 305
wideband modeling, 348
time-domain transmission, 305
timing, 111
timing budget, 120
TOF. See time of flight

533

topology, 5, 7, 104
totem-pole driver, 15, 395
transmission coefficient, 71, 312
transmission line
admittance matrix, 170
artificial, 109
characteristic impedance. See characteristic impedance
coaxial, 377
convergence problems, 348
coupled, 348
definition, 29, 56
delay. See time of flight
effective dielectric constant, 59
even mode, 363
impedance discontinuity, 71
input impedance, 122, 312
lossless, 57, 122
low-loss, 64
lumped model, 346
lumped modeling, 346
measurement, 297
modal decomposition, 351
multilumped model, 347
odd mode, 363
parallel-plate, 122
per-unit-length elements, 57, 198,
351
periodic loading, 109

[PAGE 548]
534

reflection coefficient, 70
telegrapher equations, 349
time of flight. See time of flight
transmission coefficient, 71
wave velocity, 59
wideband modeling, 369
with totem-pole driver, 19
transmission line equations
derivation, 57
directional independence. 60
frequency-domain solution, 62
impedance boundary, 70
time-domain solution, 57
transmitted noise, 138
transresistance. See resistance, transresistance
TRL, 282
TTL, 10, 13
twisted pair, 29

undershoot, 13, 41, 110, 400
uniqueness, 138, 155, 176, 208, 209,
279, 325, 377, 436

vector, 154

vector network analyzer
calibration, 282
directional coupler, 104
one-port calibration, 309

overview, 279

Index

parasitic extraction, 276
resonance, 238
scalar network analyzer, 281
vector voltmeter, 277
victim line, 98
VNA. See vector network analyzer
voltage
definition, 175, 230
modal, 202, 352, 362, 402
nomuniqueness, 279

path dependence, 155, 176

wave equation, 352
wave velocity

definition, 59

vacuum, 60
weak coupling, 99, 364, 366, 368
wideband modeling, 42, 345
wired-OR, 19

wiring rules, 110

zero, 370

[PAGE 549]
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Brian Young is a Member of the Technical Staff at the Somerset Design Center.
Semiconductor Product Sector, Motorola, working on packaging, interconnects. and
I/O design for PowerPC™ microprocessors and the RapidIO™ Interconnect Architecture. For over seven years he has specialized in simulation. modeling, measurement, and performance studies for high-speed signaling with microprocessors.
fast static RAMs, and DSPs. He has served as an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at Texas A&M University, College Station. and as
an adjunct professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering at the University
of Texas, Austin. Dr. Young holds a Ph.D. from the University of Texas. Austin.
and holds six patents related to packaging. He has published numerous articles in

conferences and journals.

535

